THE ANALYSIS OF MATTER 


THE NATURE OF THE PROBLEM 
Apart from pure mathematics, the most advanced of the 
sciences is physics. Certain parts of theoretical physics have 
reached the point which makes it possible to exhibit a logical 
chain from certain assumed premisses to consequences appar- 
ently very remote, by means of purely mathematical deduc- 
tions. This is true especially of everything that belongs to 
the general theory of relativity. It cannot be said that physics 
as a whole has yet reached this stage, since quantum pheno- 
mena, and the existence of electrons and protons, remain, for 
the moment, brute facts. But perhaps this state of affairs 
will not last long; it is not chimerical to hope that a unified 
treatment of the whole of physics may be possible before many 
years have passed. 

In spite, however, of the extraordinary successes of physics 
considered as a science, the philosophical outcome is much less 
dear than it seemed to be when less was known. The purpose 
of the present chapter is to discuss what is meant by the 
“ philosophical outcome ” of physics, and what methods exist 
for determining its nature. 

There are three kinds of questions which we may ask 
concerning physics or, indeed, concerning any science. The 
first is : What is its logical structure, considered as a deductive 
system ? What ways exist of defining the entities of physics 
and deducing the propositions from an initial apparatus of 
entities and propositions ? This is a problem in pure mathe- 
matics, for which, in its fundamental portions, mathematical 



THE NATURE OF THE PROBLEM 


logic is the proper instrument. It is not quite correct to speak, 
as we did just now, of "initial entities and propositions.” 
What we really have to begin with, in this treatment, is hypo- 
theses containing variables. In geometry, this procedure has 
become familiar. Instead of “ axioms," supposed to be 
“ true,” we have the hypothesis that a set of entities (otherwise 
undefined) has certain enumerated properties. We proceed 
to prove that such a set of entities has the properties which 
constitute the propositions of Euclidean geometry, or of 
whatever other geometry may be occupying our attention. 
Generally it will be possible to choose many different sets of 
initial hypotheses which will all yield the same body of proposi- 
tions; the choice between these sets is logically irrelevant, and 
can be guided only by asthetic considerations. There is, 
however, considerable utility in the discovery of a few simple 
hypotheses which will yield the whole of some deductive 
system, since it enables us to know what tests are necessary 
and sufficient in deciding whether some given set of 
entities satisfies the deductive system. Moreover, the word 
" entities,” which we have been using, is too narrow if used 
with any metaphysical implication. The " entities ” con- 
cerned may, in a given application of a deductive system, 
be complicated logical structures. Of this we have examples 
in pure mathematics in the definitions of cardinal numbers, 
ratios, real numbers, etc. We must be prepared for the 
possibility of a similar result in physics, in the definition of a 
" point ” of space-time, and even in the definition of an electron 
or a proton. 

The logical analysis of a deductive system is not such a 
definite and limited undertaking as it appears at first sight. 
This is due to the circmnstance just mentioned — namely, that 
what we took at first as primitive entities may be replaced by 
comphcated logical structures. As this circumstance has an 
important bearing upon the philosophy of physics, it will be 



THE NATURE OF THE PROBLEM 


worth while to illustrate its effect by examples from other 
fields. 

One of the best examples is the theory of finite integers. 
Weierstrass and others had shown that the whole of analysis 
was reducible to propositions about finite integers, when Peano 
showed that these propositions were all deducible from five 
initial propositions involving three undefined ideas.* The 
five initial propositions might be regarded as assigning certain 
properties to the group of three undefined ideas, the proper- 
ties in question being of a logical, not specifically arithmetical, 
character. What was proved by Peano was this : Given any 
triad having the five properties in question, every proposition 
of arithmetic and analysis is true of this triad, provided the 
interpretation appropriate to this triad is adopted. But it 
appeared further that there is one such triad corresponding to 
each infinite series %, x^, %, . . . . . ., in which there is 

just one term corresponding to each finite integer. Such series 
can be defined without mentioning integers. Any such series 
could be taken, instead of the series of finite integers, as the 
basis of arithmetic and analysis. Every proposition of arith- 
metic and analysis will remain true for any such series, but for 
each series it will be a different proposition from what it is 
for any other series. 

Take, in illustration, some simple proposition of arithmetic, 
say: “ The sum of the first n odd numbers is n*.” Suppose we 
wish to interpret this proposition as applying to the progres- 
sion Xq, Xi, X2, ... x„, .. . In this progression, let R be the 
relation of each term to its successor. Then “ odd numbers ” 
will mean “ terms having to x^ a relation which is a power of 
R*,” where R‘ is the relation of an x to the next x but one.t 
We can now define i?®» as meaning that power of R which 
relates Xq to x„, and we can further define x„ as meaning 

• On this subject, cf. Principles of Mathematics, chap. xiv. 

t The definition of powers of a relation, in a form not involving 
numbers, is set forth in Principia Mathematica, *91. 



THE NATURE OF THE PROBLEM 


that X to which has the relation This decides the 
interpretation of “ the sum of the first n odd numbers." To 
define n*. it will be best to define multiplication. We have 
defined consider the relation formed by the relative 
product of the craiverse of R together with i?**. This relation 
relates x^ to x ^ ; its square relates % to *211 1 its cube relates 
X3 to Xa^, etc. Any power of this relation can be shown to 
be equivalent to a certain power of the converse of R multiplied 
relatively by a certain power of /?*«. There is thus one power 
of this relation which is equivalent to moving backward from 
Xm to Xq, and then forward; the term to which the forward 
movement takes us is defined as x„ x x^. Thus we can now 
interpret a;,’. It will be found that the proposition from 
which we started is true with this interpretation. 

It follows from the above that, if we start from Peano’s 
undefined ideas and initial propositions, arithmetic and analysis 
are not concerned with definite logical objects called numbers, 
but with the terms of any progression. We may call the terms 
of any progression o, i, 2, 3, . . ., in which case, with a suitable 
interpretation of + and x , aU the propositions of arithmetic 
will be true of these terms. Thus 0, i, 2, 3, . . ., become 
“ variables.” To make them constants, we must choose 
some one definite progression ; the natural one to choose is the 
progression of finite cardinal numbers as defined by Frege. 
What were, in Peano’s methods, primitive terms are thus 
replaced by logical structures, concerning which it is necessary 
to prove that they satisfy Peano's five primitive propositions. 
This process is essential in coimecting arithmetic with pure 
logic. We shall find that a process similar in some respects, 
though very different in others, is required for connecting 
physics with perception. 

The general process of which the above is an instance will 
be called the process of "interpretation.” It frequently 
happens that we have a deductive mathematical system. 



THE NATURE OF THE PROBLEM 


starting from hypotheses concerning undefined objects, and 
that we have reason to believe that there are objects fulfilling 
these hypotheses, although, initially, we are unable to point out 
any such objects with certainty. Usually, in such cases, 
although many different sets of objects are abstractly avail- 
able as fulfilling the hypotheses, there is one such set which is 
much more important than the others. In the above instance, 
this set was the cardinal numbers. The substitution of such 
a set for the undefined objects is “ interpretation.” This 
process is essential in discovering the philosophical import of 
physics. 

The difference between an important and an unimportant 
interpretation may be made clear by the case of geometry. 
Any geometry. Euclidean or non-Euclidean, in which every 
point has co-ordinates which are real numbers, can be inter- 
preted as applying to a system of sets of real numbers — i.e, 
a point can be taken to be the series of its co-ordinates. This 
interpretation is legitimate, and is convenient when we are 
studying geometry as a branch of pure mathematics. But it 
is not the important interpretation. Geometry is important, 
unlike arithmetic and analysis, because it can be interpreted 
so as to be part of applied mathematics — in fact, so as to be 
part of physics. It is this interpretation which is the reaUy 
interesting one, and we cannot therefore rest content with the 
interpretation which makes geometry part of the study of real 
numbers, and so, ultimately, part of the study of finite integers. 
Geometry, as we shall consider it in the present work, will be 
always treated as part of physics, and will be regarded as dealing 
with objects which are not either mere variables or definable 
in purely logical terms. We shall not regard a geometry 
as satisfactorily interpreted until its initial objects have been 
defined in terms of entities forming part of the empirical 
world, as opposed to the world of logical necessity. It is, of 
course, possible, and even likely, that various different geo- 



THE NATURE OF THE PROBLEM 


metries, which would be incompatible if applied to the same set 
of objects, may all be applicable to the empirical world by 
means of different interpretations. 

So far, we have been considering the logical analysis of 
physics, which will form the topic of Part I. But in relation 
to the interpretation of geometry we have already been brought 
into contact with a very different problem — ^namely, that of 
the application of physics to the empirical world. This is, of 
course, the vital problem: although physics can be pursued as 
pure mathematics, it is not as pure mathematics that physics 
is important. What is to be said about the logical analysis 
of physics is therefore only a necessary preliminary to our 
main theme. The laws of physics are believed to be at least 
approximately true, although they are not logically necessary; 
the evidence for them is empirical. All empirical evidence 
consists, in the last analysis, of perceptions ; thus the world of 
physics must be, in some sense, continuous with the world of 
our perceptions, since it is the latter which supplies the evidence 
for the laws of physics. In the time of Galileo, this fact did 
not seem to raise any very difficult problems, since the world 
of physics had not yet become so abstract and remote as 
subsequent research has made it. But already in the philo- 
sophy of Descartes the modem problem is implicit, and with 
Berkeley it becomes explicit. The problem arises because the 
world of physics is, prima facie, so different from the world of 
perception that it is difficult to see how the one can afford 
evidence for the other ; moreover, physics and physiology them- 
selves seem to give grounds for supposing that perception 
cannot give very accurate information as to the external world, 
and thixs weaken the props upon which they are built. 

This difficulty has led, especially in the works of Dr White- 
head, to a new interpretation of physics, which is to make the 
world of matter less remote from the world of our experience. 
The principles which inspire Dr Whitehead’s work appear to 



THE NATURE OF THE PROBLEM 


me essential to a right solution of the problem, although in 
the detail I should sometimes incline to a somewhat more con- 
servative attitude. We may state the problem abstractly 
as follows: 

The evidence for the truth of physics is that perceptions 
occur as the laws of physics would lead us to expect — e.g. we 
see an eclipse when the astronomers say there will be an eclipse. 
But physics itself never says anything about perceptions; 
it does not say that we shall see an eclipse, but says something 
about the sun and moon. The passage from what physics 
asserts to the expected perception is left vague and casual; it 
has none of the mathematical precision belonging to physics 
itself. We must therefore find an interpretation of physics 
which gives a due place to perceptions ; if not, we have no right 
to appeal to the empirical evidence. 

This problem has two parts : to assimilate the physical world 
to the world of perceptions, and to assimilate the world of 
perceptions to the physical world. Physics must be inter- 
preted in a way which tends towards idealism, and perception 
in a way which tends towards materialism. I believe that 
matter is less material, and mind less mental, than is commonly 
supposed, and that, when this is realized, the difficulties 
raised by Berkeley largely disappear. Some of the difficulties 
raised by Hume, it is true, have not yet been disposed of; 
but they concern scientific method in general, more particularly 
induction. On these matters I do not propose to say anything 
in the present volvune, which will throughout assume the general 
validity of scientific method properly conducted. 

The problems which arise m attempting to bridge the gulf 
between physics (as commonly interpreted) and perception 
are of two kinds. There is first the epistemological problem: 
what facts and entities do we know of that are relevant to 
physics, and may serve as its empirical fovmdation ? This 
demands a discussion of what, exactly, is to be learnt from a 



THE NATURE OF THE PROBLEM 


perception, and also of the generally assumed physical causa- 
tion of perceptions — e.g. by light-waves or soimd-waves. In 
connection with this latter question, it is necessary to consider 
how far, and in what way, a perception can be supposed to 
resemble its external cause, or, at least, to allow inferences as 
to characteristics of that cause. This, in turn, demands a 
careful consideration of causal laws, which, however, is in any 
case a necessary part of the philosophical analysis of physics. 
Throughout this inquiry, we are asking ourselves what grounds 
exist for supposing that physics is “ true.” But the meaning 
of this question requires some elucidation in connection with 
what has already been said about interpretation. 

Apart altogether from the general philosophical problem of 
the meaning of ” truth,” there is a certain degree of vagueness 
about the question whether physics is ” true.” In the 
narrowest sense, we may say that physics is “ true ” if we have 
the perceptions which it leads us to expect. In this sense, a 
solipsist might say that physics is true; for, although he would 
suppose that the sun and moon, for instance, are merely certain 
series of perceptions of his own, yet these perceptions could be 
foreseen by assuming the generally received laws of astronomy. 
So, for example, Leibniz says: 

" Although the whole of this life were said to be nothing 
but a dream, and the visible world nothing but a phemtasm, 
I should call this dream or phantasm real enough, if, using 
reason well, we were never deceived by it.”* 

A man who, without being a sohpsist, believes that whatever 
is real is mental, need have no difficulty in declaring that 
physics is " true ” in the above sense, and may even go further, 
and allow the truth of physics in a much wider sense. This 
wider sense, which I regard as the more important, is as follows : 
Given physics as a deductive system, derived from certain 
h3qx)theses as to undefined terms, do there exist particulars, 
* Philosophische Werke, Gerhardt’s edition, vol. vii., p. 320. 



THE NATURE OF THE PROBLEM 


or logical structures composed of particulars, which satisfy 
these hypotheses ? If the answer is in the affirmative, then 
physics is completely “ true.” We shall find, if I am not mis- 
taken, that no conclusive reason can be given for a fully affirma- 
tive answer, but that such an answer emerges naturally if we 
adopt the view that all our perceptions are causally related to 
antecedents which may not be perceptions. This is the view 
of common sense, and has always been, at least in practice, 
the view of physicists. We start, in physics, with a vague mass 
of common-sense beliefs, which we can subject to progressive 
refinements without destro5nng the truth of physics (in our 
present sense of “ truth ”); but if we attempt, like Descartes, 
to doubt all common-sense beliefs, we shall be unable to demon- 
strate that any absurdity results from the rejection of the above 
hypothesis as to the causes of perceptions, and we shall 
therefore be left uncertain as to whether physics is fully ” true ” 
or not. In these circumstances, it would seem to be a matter 
of individual taste whether we adopt or reject what may be 
called the realist h3^thesis. 

The epistemological problem, which we have just been stating 
in outline, will occupy Part II. of the present work. Part III. 
will be occupied with the outcome for ontology — i.e. with the 
question: What are the ultimate existents in terms of which 
physics is true (assuming that there are such) ? And what is 
their general structure ? And what are the relations of space- 
time, causality, and qualitative series respectively ? (By 
" qualitative series ” I mean such as are formed by the colours 
of the rainbow, or by notes of various pitches.) We shall find, 
if I am not mistaken, that the objects which are mathematically 
primitive in physics, such as electrons, protons, and points in 
space-time, are all logically complex structures composed of 
entities which are metaphysically more primitive, which may 
be conveniently called “events.” It is a matter for mathe- 
matical logic to show how to construct, out of these, the 



THE NATURE OF THE PROBLEM 


objects required by the mathematical physicist. It belongs 
also to this part of our subject to inquire whether there is 
anything in the known world that is not part of this meta- 
physically primitive material of physics. Here we derive great 
assistance from our earlier epistemological inquiries, since these 
enable us to see how ph5rsics and psychology can be included 
in one science, more concrete than the former and more com- 
prehensive than the latter. Physics, in itself, is exceedingly 
abstract, and reveals only certain mathematical characteristics 
of the material with which it deals. It does not teU us any- 
thing as to the intrinsic character of this material. Psychology 
is preferable in this respect, but is not causally autonomous: 
if we assume that psychical events are subject, completely, to 
causal laws, we are compelled to postulate apparently extra- 
psychical causes for some of them. But by bringing physics 
and perception together, we are able to include psychical 
events in the material of physics, and to give to physics the 
greater concreteness which results from our more intimate 
acquaintance with the subject-matter of our own experience. 
To show that the traditional separation between physics and 
psychology, mind and matter, is not metaphysically defensible, 
will be one of the piuposes of this work ; but the two will be 
brought together, not by subordinating either to the other, 
but by displaying each as a logical structure composed of 
what, following Dr H. M. Sheffer,* we shall call " neutral 
stuff.” We shall not contend that there are demonstrative 
grounds in favour of this construction, but only that it is 
recommended by the usual scientific grounds of economy and 
comprehensiveness of theoretical explanation. 

• See Preface to Holt’s Concept of Consciousness. 



PART I 

THE LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF PHYSICS 




CHAPTER II 

PRE-RELATIVITY PHYSICS 

The physics of Newton, considered as a deductive system, had 
a perfection which is absent from the physics of the present 
day. Science has two purposes, each of which tends to con- 
flict with the other. On the one hand, there is a desire to know 
as much as possible of the facts in the region concerned; on 
the other hand, there is the attempt to embrace all the known 
facts in the smallest possible number of general laws. The 
law of gravitation accounted for all the facts about the motions 
of the planets and their satellites which were known in Newton’s 
day; at the time, it exhibited the ideal of science. But facts 
and theories seem destined to conflict sooner or later. When 
this happens, there is a tendency either to deny the facts or to 
despair of theory. Thanks to Einstein, the minute facts which 
have been found incompatible with the natural philosophy of 
Newton have been fitted into a new natural philosophy; but 
there is not yet the complete theoretical harmony that existed 
while Newton was undisputed. 

It is necessary to say something about the Newtonian S5^tem, 
since everything subsequent has arisen as an amendment to it, 
not as a fresh start. Most of the fundamental concepts of this 
system are due to Galileo, but the complete structme appears 
first in Newton’s Principia. The theory is simple and mathe- 
matical; indeed, one of its main differences from modem 
theories is its belief (perhaps traceable to Greek geometry) 
that Nature is convenient for the mathematician, and requires 
little manipulation before his concepts become applicable. 

The Newtonian system, stated with schematic simplicity, 
as, e.g., by Boscovitch, is as follows. There is an absolute 

13 



PRE-RELATIVITY PHYSICS 


space, composed of points, and an absolute time, composed of 
instants ; there are particles of matter, each of which persists 
through all time and occupies a point at each instant. Each 
particle exerts forces on other particles, the effect of which is 
to produce accelerations. Each particle is associated with a 
certain quantity, its " mass,” which is inversely proportional 
to the acceleration produced in the particle by a given force. 
The laws of physics are conceived, on the analogy of the law of 
gravitation, as formulas giving the force exerted by one particle 
on another in a given relative situation. This system is 
logically faultless. It was criticized on the ground that 
absolute space and time were meaningless, and on the ground 
that action at a distance was inconceivable. This latter objec- 
tion was sanctioned by Newton, who was not a strict New- 
tonian. But in fact neither objection had any force from a 
logical point of view. Kant’s antinomies, and the supposed 
difficulties of infinity and continuity, were finally disposed of 
by Georg Cantor. There was no valid a priori reason for sup- 
posing that Nature was not such as the Newtonians averred, 
and their scientific successes afforded empirical, or at least 
pragmatic, arguments in their favour. It is no wonder, there- 
fore, that, throughout the eighteenth century, the system of 
ideas which had led to the law of gravitation dominated all 
scientific thought. 

Before physics itself had made any breaches in this edifice, 
there were, however, certain objections of an epistemological 
order. It will be worth while to consider these, since it is urged 
that the theory of relativity is not open to them, though I 
believe this claim to be only partially justified. 

The most formidable and persistent attack was upon absolute 
space and time. This attack was initiated by Leibniz in the 
lifetime of Newton, especiaUy in his controversy with Clarke, 
who represented Newton. In time, most physicists came to 
disbelieve in absolute space and time, while retaining the New- 



PRE-RELATIVITY PHYSICS 


tonian technique, which assumed their existence. In Clerk 
Maxwell’s Matter and Motion, absolute motion is asserted 
in one passage and denied in another, with hardly any attempt 
to reconcile these two opinions. But at the end of the nine- 
teenth century the prevalent view was certainly that of Mach, 
who vigorously denied absolute space and time. Although 
this denial has now been proved to be right, I cannot think 
that before Einstein and Minkowski it had any conclusive 
arguments in its favour. In spite of the fact that the whole 
question is now ancient history, it may be instructive to con- 
sider the arguments briefly. 

The important reasons for rejecting absolute space and time 
were two. First, that everything we can observe has to do 
only with the relative positions of bodies and events ; secondly, 
that points and instants are an unnecessary hypothesis, and 
are therefore to be rejected in accordance with the principle 
of economy, which is the same thing as Occam’s razor. It 
appears to me that the first of these arguments has no force, 
while the second was false until the advent of the theory of 
relativity. My reasons are as follows ; 

That we can only observe relative positions is, of course, true ; 
but science assumes many things that cannot be observed, 
for the sake of simplicity and continuity in causal laws. 
Leibniz assumed that there are infinitesimals, although every- 
thing that we can observe exceeds a certain minimum size. 
We all think that the earth has an inside, and the moon a side 
which we cannot see. But, it will be said, these things are like 
what we observe, and circumstances can be imagined under 
which we should observe them, whereas absolute space and 
time are different in kind from anything directly known, and 
could not be directly known in any conceivable conditions. 
Unfortunately, however, this applies equally to physical bodies. 
The relative positions which we see are relative positions of 
parts of the visual field; but the things in the visual field are 



i6 PRE-RELATIVITY PHYSICS 

not bodies as conceived in traditional physics, which is domin- 
ated by the Cartesian dualism of mind and matter, and places 
the visual field in the former. This argument is not valid as 
against Mach, who argued that our sensations are actually part 
of the ph5reical world, and thus inaugurated the movement 
towards neutral monism, which denies the ultimate validity 
of the mind-matter dualism. But it is valid as against all those 
for whom matter is a sort of Ding-an-sick, essentially different 
from anything that enters into our experience. For them, it 
should be as illegitimate to infer matter from our perceptions 
as to infer absolute space and time. The one, like the other, is 
part of our naive beliefs, as is shown by the Copernican con- 
troversy, which would have been impossible for men who re- 
jected absolute space and time. And the remoteness from our 
perceptions is as much a discovery due to reflection in the one 
case as in the other. 

It is impossible to lay down a hard-and-fast rule that we can 
never validly infer something radically different from what we 
observe — unless, indeed, we take up the position that nothing 
unobserved can ever be validly inferred. This view, which 
is advocated by Wittgenstein in his Tractaius Logico-Philo- 
sophicus, has much in its favour, from the standpoint of a strict 
logic; but it puts an end to physics, and therefore to the 
problem with which this work is concerned. I shall accordingly 
assume that scientific inference, conducted with due care, 
may be valid, provided it is recognized as giving only proba- 
bility, not certainty. Given this assumption, I see no possible 
grovmd for rejecting an inference to absolute space and time, 
if the facts seem to call for it. It may be admitted that it is 
better, if possible, to avoid inferring anything very different 
from what we know to exist. Such a principle will have to be 
based on grounds of probability. It may be said that all infer- 
ences to something unobserved are only probable, and that their 
probability depends, in part, upon the a priori probability 



PRE-RELATIVITY PHYSICS 


17 


of the hypothesis ; this may be supposed greater when we infer 
something similar to what we know than when we infer some- 
thing dissimilar. But it seems questionable whether there is 
much force in this argument. Everything that we perceive 
directly is subject to certain conditions, more especially physio- 
logical conditions ; it would seem a priori probable that where 
these conditions are absent things would be different from any- 
thing that we can experience. If we suppose — as we well 
may — that what we experience has certain characteristics con- 
nected with our experiencing, there can be no a priori objection 
to the hypothesis that some of the things we do not experience 
are lacking in some characteristics which are universal in our 
experience. The inference to absolute space and time must, 
therefore, be treated as on a level with any other inductive 
inference. 

The second argument against absolute space and time — 
namely, that they are unnecessary hypotheses — has turned out 
to be valid; but it is only in quite recent times that Newton’s 
argument to the contrary has been refuted. The argument, 
as everyone knows, was concerned with absolute rotation. 
It is urged that, for " absolute rotation,” we may substitute 
” rotation relatively to the fixed stars.” This is formally 
correct, but the influence attributed to the fixed stars savours 
of astrology, and is scientifically incredible. Apart from this 
special argument, the whole of the Newtonian technique is 
based upon the assumption that there is such a quantity as 
absolute acceleration; without this, the system collapses. 
That is one reason why the law of gravitation cannot enter 
unchanged into the general theory of relativity. There are, 
of course, two distinct elements in the theory of relativity; 
one of them — the merging of space and time into space-time — 
is wholly new, while the other — the substitution of relative for 
absolute motion — has been attempted ever since the time of 
Leibniz. But this older problem could not be solved by 



PRE-RELATIVITY PHYSICS 


itself, because of the necessity for absolute acceleration in 
Newtonian dynamics. Only the method of tensors, and the 
new law of gravitation obtained in accordance with this method, 
have made it possible to answer Newton’s arguments for 
absolute space and time. While, therefore, the contention that 
these are unnecessary would always have been a valid ground 
for rejecting them if it had been known to be true, it is only now 
that we can be confident of its correctness, since it is only now 
that we possess a mathematical technique which is in accord- 
ance with it. 

Somewhat similar considerations apply to action at a dis- 
tance, which was also considered incredible by Newton’s critics, 
from Leibniz onwards, and even by Newton himself. There 
is one theory, which may well be true, according to which 
action at a distance is self-contradictory: this is the theory 
which derives spatio-temporal separation from causal separa- 
tion. I shall say no more about this possibility at present, 
since it was not suggested by any of the opponents of action at 
a distance, all of whom considered spatial and temporal rela- 
tions totally distinct from causal relations. From their point 
of view, therefore, the objection to action at a distance seems 
to have been little more than a prejudice. The source of the 
prejudice was, I think, twofold: first, that the notion of 
“ force,” which was the dynamical form of " cause,” was derived 
from the sensations of pushing and pulling; secondly, that 
people falsely supposed themselves in contact with things when 
they pushed and pulled them, or were pushed and pulled by 
them. I do not mean that such crude notions would have been 
explicitly defended, but that they dominated the imaginative 
picture of the physical world, and made Nevirtonian dsmamics 
seem what is absurdly called " intelligible.” Apart from such 
mistakes, it should have been regarded as a purely empirical 
question whether there is action at a distance or not. It was 
in fact so regarded throughout the latter half or three-quarters 



PRE-RELATIVITY PHYSICS 


of the eighteenth century, and it was generally held that the 
empirical arguments in favour of action at a distance were 
overwhelming. 

Not wholly unconnected with the question of action at a 
distance was the question of the role of " force ” in d5mamics. 
In Newton, " force ” plays a great part, and there seems no 
doubt that he regarded it as a vera causa. If there was action 
at a distance, the use of the words " central forces ” seemed to 
make it somehow more " intelligible.” But gradually it was 
increasingly realized that “ force ” is merely a connecting link 
between configurations and accelerations ; that, in fact, causal 
laws of the sort leading to differential equations are what we 
need, and that " force ” is by no means necessary for the 
enunciation of such laws. Kirchoff and Mach developed a 
mechanics which dispensed with “ force,” and Hertz perfected 
their views in a treatise* comparable to Euclid from the point 
of view of logical beauty, leading to the result that there is 
only one law of motion, to the effect that, in a certain defined 
sense, every particle describes a geodesic. Although the whole 
of this development involved no essential departure from 
Newton, it paved the way for relativity dyneimics, and pro- 
vided much of the necessary mathematical apparatus, particu- 
larly in the use of the principle of least action. 

The first physical theory to be developed on lines definitely 
different from those of Newtonian astronomy was the un- 
dulatory theory of light. Not that there was anything to 
contradict Newton, but that the framework of ideas was 
different. Transmission through a medium had been made 
fashionable by Descartes, and unfashionable by the New- 
tonians ; in the case of the transmission of light it was found 
necessary to revert to the older point of view. Moreover, the 
aether was never so comfortably material as “ gross ” matter. 
It could vibrate, but it did not seem to consist of little bits 
• PrinHfien der Mechanik. 



20 


PRE-RELATIVITY PHYSICS 


each with its own individuality, or to be subject to any dis- 
coverable molar motions. No one knew whether it was a jelly 
or a gas. Its properties could not be inferred from those of 
billiard balls, but were merely those demanded by its functions. 
In fact, like a painfully good boy, it only did what it was told, 
and might therefore be expected to die young. 

A more serious change was introduced by Faraday and 
Maxwell. Light had never been treated on the analogy of 
gravitation, but electricity appeared to consist of central 
forces varying inversely as the square of the distance, and 
was therefore confidently fitted into the Newtonian scheme. 
Faraday experimentally and Maxwell theoretically displayed 
the inadequacy of this view; Maxwell, moreover, demonstrated 
the identity of light and electromagnetism. The aether 
required for the two kinds of phenomena was therefore the 
same, which gave it a much better claim to be supposed to 
exist. Maxwell’s proof, it is true, was not conclusive, but it 
was made so by Hertz when he produced electromagnetic waves 
artificially and studied their properties experimentally. It 
thus became clear that Maxwell’s equations, which contained 
practically the whole of his system, must take their place 
beside the law of gravitation as affording the mathematical 
formula for a vast range of phenomena. The concepts required 
for these equations were, at first, not definitely contradictory 
to the Newtonian d5mamics; but by the help of subsequent, 
experimental results contradictions emerged which were only 
removed by the theory of relativity. Of this, however, we 
shall speak in a later chapter. 

Another breach in the orthodox system, of which the 
importance has only become fully manifest since the publica_ 
tion of the general theory of relativity, was the invention of 
non-Euclidean geometry. In the work of Lobatchevsky and 
Bolyai, although the philosophical challenge to Euclid was 
already complete, and the consequent argument against Kant’s 



PRE-RELATIVITY PHYSICS 


transcendental aesthetic very powerful, there were not yet, 
at leaist obviously, the far-reaching physical implications of 
Riemann’s inaugural dissertation “ Ueber die Hypothesen, 
welche der Geometric zu Grunde liegen." A few words on 
this topic are imavoidable at this stage, although the full 
discussion will come later. 

One broad result of non-Euclidean geometry, even in its 
earliest form, was that the geometry of actual space is, at 
least in part, an empirical study, not a branch of pure mathe- 
matics. It may be said that empiricists, such as J. S. Mill, 
always based geometry upon empirical observation. But they 
did the same with arithmetic, in which they were certainly 
mistaken. No one before the non-Euclideans perceived that 
arithmetic and geometry stand on a quite different footing, 
the former being continuous with pure logic and independent 
of experience, the latter being continuous with physics and 
dependent upon physical data. Geometry can, it is true, be 
still studied as a branch of pure mathematics, but it is then 
hypothetical, and cannot claim that its initial hypotheses 
(which replace the axioms) are true in fact, since this is a ques- 
tion outside the scope of pure mathematics. The geometry 
which is required by the engineer or the astronomer is not a 
branch of pure mathematics, but a branch of physics. Indeed, 
in the hands of Einstein geometry has become identical with 
the whole of the general part of theoretical physics; the two 
are united in the general theory of relativity. 

Riemann, who was logically the immediate predecessor of 
Einstein, brought in a new idea of which the importance was 
not perceived for half a century. He considered that geometry 
ought to start from the infinitesimal, and depend upon integra- 
tion for statements about finite lengths, areas, or volumes. 
This requires, inter alia, the replacement of the straight line 
by the geodesic : the latter has a definition depending upon 
infinitesimal distances, while the former has not. The tradi- 



PRE-RELATIVITY PHYSICS 


tional view was that, while the length of a curve could, in 
general, only be defined by integration, the length of the straight 
line between two points could be defined as a whole, not as 
the limit of a sum of little bits. Riemann’s view was that a 
straight line does not differ from a curve in this respect. More- 
over, measurement, being performed by means of bodies, is 
a physical operation, and its resxilts depend for their interpreta- 
tion upon the laws of physics. This point of view has turned 
out to be of very great importance. Its scope has been ex- 
tended by the theory of relativity, but in essence it is to be found 
in Riemann’s dissertation. 

Riemann’s work, as well as that of Faraday and Maxwell, 
belongs, like the theory of relativity, to the development of the 
view of the physical world as a continuous medium, which 
has, from the earliest times, contested the mastery with the 
atomic view. Just as Newton caused absolute space and time 
to be embedded in the technique of dynamics, so Pythagoras 
caused spatial atomism to be embedded in the teclmique of 
geometry. Ever since Greek times, those who did not believe 
in the reality of “ points ” were faced with the difficulty that 
a geometry based on points works, while no other way of start- 
ing geometry was known. Tliis difficulty, as Dr Whitehead 
has shown, exists no longer. It is now possible, as we shall 
see at a later stage, to interpret geometry and physics with 
material all of which is of a finite size — it is even possible to 
demand that none of the material shall be smaller than an 
assigned finite size. The fact that this hypothesis can be 
reconciled with mathematical continuity is a novel discovery 
of considerable importance; until recently, atomism and con- 
tinuity appeared incompatible. There are, however, forms 
of atomism which have not hitherto been found easy to 
reconcile with continuity ; and, as it happens, there is powerful 
experimental evidence in their favour. Just at the moment 
when Maxwell, supplemented by Hertz, appeared to have 



PRE-REIATIVITY PHYSICS 


23 


reduced everything to continuity, the new evidence for an 
atomic view of Nature began to accumulate. There is still an 
unreconciled conflict, one set of facts pointing in one direction, 
and another in another ; but it is legitimate to hope that the 
conflict will be resolved before long. Modem atomism, 
however, demands a new chapter. 



CHAPTER III 
ELECTRONS AND PROTONS 

Physics, at the present time, is divisible into two parts, the 
one dealing with the propagation of energy in matter or in 
regions where there is no matter, the other with the inter- 
changes of energy between these regions and matter. The 
former is found to require continuity, the latter discontinuity. 
But before considering this apparent conflict, it will be advis- 
able to deal in outline with the discontinuous characteristics 
of matter and energy as they appear in the theory of quanta 
and in the structure of atoms. It is necessary, however, for 
philosophical purposes, to deal only with the most general 
aspects of modem theories, since the subject is developing 
rapidly, and any statement runs a risk of being out of date 
before it can be printed. The topics considered in this chapter 
and the next have been treated in an entirely new way by the 
theory initiated by Heisenberg in 1925. I shall, however, 
postpone the consideration of this theory until after that of 
the Rutherford-Bohr atom and the theory of quanta con- 
nected with it. 

It appears that both matter and electricity are concentrated 
exclusively in certain finite units, called electrons and protons. 
It is possible that the helium nucleus may be a third indepen- 
dent unit, but this seems improbable.* The net positive charge 
of a helium nucleus is double that of a proton, and its mass is 
slightly less than four times that of a proton. These facts 
are explicable (including the slight deficiency of mass) if the 

* Professors F. Paneth and K. Peters claim to have transformed 
hydrogen into helium. If this claim is substantiated, it disposes 
definitively of the possibility that the helium nucleus is an independent 
unit. See Nature, October 9, 1926, p. 526. 



ELECTRONS AND PROTONS 


25 


helium nucleus consists of four protons and two electrons; 
otherwise, they seem an almost incredible coincidence. We 
may therefore assume that electrons and protons are the sole 
constituents of matter; if it should turn out that the helium 
nucleus must be added, that would make little difference to 
the philosophical analysis of matter, which is our task in this 
volume. 

Protons all have the same mass and the same amount of 
positive electricity. Electrons all have the same mass, about 
of the mass of a proton. The amount of negative elec- 
tricity on an electron is always the same, and is such as to 
balance exactly the amount on a proton, so that one electron 
and one proton together constitute an electrically neutral 
system. An atom consists, when unelectrified, of a nucleus 
surrounded by planetary electrons : the number of these elec- 
trons is the atomic number of the element concerned. The 
nucleus consists of protons and electrons: the number of the 
former is the atomic weight of the element, the number of the 
latter is such as to make the whole electrically neutral — i.e. 
it is the difference between the number of protons in the nucleus 
and the number of planetary electrons. Every item in this 
complicated structure is supposed, at normal times, to be 
engaged in motions which result, on Newtonian principles 
(modified slightly by relativity considerations), from the 
attractions between electrons and protons and the repulsions 
between protons and protons as well as between electrons and 
electrons. But of all the motions which should be possible 
on the analogy of the solar system, it is held that only an 
infinitesimal proportion are in fact possible; this depends upon 
the theory of quanta, in ways which we shall consider later. 

The calculation of the orbits of planetary electrons, on 
Newtonian principles, is only possible in the two simplest 
cases : that of hydrogen, which consists (when unelectrified) 
of one proton and one electron; and that of positively electri- 



26 


ELECTRONS AND PROTONS 


fied helium, which has lost one, but not both, of its planetary 
electrons. In these two cases the mathematical theory is 
practically complete. In all other cases which actually occur, 
although the mathematics required is of a sort which has been 
investigated ever since the time of Newton, it is impossible to 
obtain exact solutions, or even good approximations. The 
case is still worse as regards nuclei. The nucleus of hydrogen 
is a single proton, but that of the next element, helium, 
is held to consist of four protons and two electrons. The com- 
bination must be extraordinarily stable, both because no 
known process disintegrates the helium nucleus, and because 
of the loss of mass involved. {If the mass of the helium atom 
is taken as 4, that of a hydrogen atom is not i, but i-oo8.) 
This latter argument depends upon considerations connected 
with relativity, and must therefore be discussed at a later stage. 
Various suggestions have been made as to the way in which 
the protons and electrons are arranged in the helium nucleus, 
but none, so far, has yielded the necessary stability. What 
we may call the geometry of nuclei is therefore still unknown. 
It may be that, at the very small distances involved, the law 
of force is not the inverse square, although this law is found 
perfectly satisfactory in dealing with the motions of the plane- 
tary electron in the two cases in which the mathematics is 
feasible. This, however, is merely a speculation; for the 
present we must be content with ignorance as regards the 
arrangement of protons and electrons in nuclei other than that 
of hydrogen (which contains no electron in the nucleus). 

So long as an atom remains in a state of steady motion, it 
gives no evidence of its existence to the outside world. A 
material system displays its existence to outsiders by radiating 
or absorbing energy, and in no other way ; and an atom does 
not absorb or part with energy except when it undergoes sudden 
revolutionary changes of the sort considered by the theory of 
quanta. This is of' importance from our point of view, since 



ELECTRONS AND PROTONS 


27 


it shows that no empirical evidence can decide between two 
theories of the atom which yield the same result as regards the 
interchanges of energy between the atom and the surrounding 
medium. It may be that the whole Rutherford-Bohr theory 
is too concrete and pictorial; the analogy with the solar system 
may be much less close than it is represented as being. A 
theory which accounts for all the known facts is not thereby 
shown to be true ; this would require a proof that no other 
theory would do the same. Such a proof is very seldom 
possible ; certainly it is not possible in the case of the structure 
of the atom. What may be taken as firm ground is the 
numerical part of the theory. Certain quantities, and certain 
whole numbers, are clearly involved; but it would be rash to 
say that such and such an interpretation of these quantities 
and whole numbers is the only one possible. It is proper and 
right to use a pictorial theory as a help in investigation; but 
what can count as definite knowledge is something much more 
abstract. And it is quite possible that the truth does not lend 
itself to pictorial statement, but only to expression in mathe- 
matical formulae. This, as we shall see, is the view taken by 
what we may call the Heisenberg theory. 

It may be worth while to linger a moment over this question 
of the nature of our real knowledge concerning atoms. In the 
last analysis, all our knowledge of matter is derived from 
perceptions, which are themselves causally dependent upon 
effects on our body. In sight, for example, we depend upon 
light-waves which impinge upon the eye. Given the waves, 
we shall have the visual perception, assuming no defect in the 
eye. Therefore nothing in visual perception alone can enable 
us to distinguish between two theories which give the same 
result as regards the light-waves which reach hxunan eyes. 
This, as stated, seems to introduce psychological considerations. 
But we may put the matter in a way that makes its physical 
significance clearer. Consider an oval surface, which is liable 



ELECTRONS AND PROTONS 


to continuous motion and change of shape, but persists 
throughout time ; and let us suppose that no human being has 
ever been inside this surface. In illustration, we might take 
a sphere smrounding the sun, or a little box surrounding an 
electron which never forms part of a human body. Energy 
will cross this surface, sometimes inward, sometimes outward. 
Two views which lead to the same results as to the flow of energy 
across the boundary are empirically indistinguishable, since 
everything that we know independently of physical theory 
lies outside the surface. We may enlarge our oval surface 
until its “ inside ” consists of everything outside the body of 
the physicist concerned — to wit, ourselves. What we hear, 
and what we read in books, comes to us entirely through a flow 
of energy across the boundary of our body. It may well be 
maintained that our direct knowledge is less than this state- 
ment would imply, but it is certainly not greater. Two 
universes which give the same results for the flow of energy 
across the boundary of A’s body will be totally indistinguish- 
able for A. 

My object in bringing up these considerations is partly to 
give a new turn to the argument about solipsism. As a rule, 
solipsism is taken as a form of idealism — namely, the view 
that nothing exists except my mind and my mental events. 
I think, however, that it would be just as rational, or just as 
irrational, to say that nothing exists outside my body, or that 
nothing exists outside a certain closed surface which includes 
my body. Neither of these is the general form of the argu- 
ment. The general form is that first given above — ^namely, 
that, given any region not containing myself, two physical 
theories which give the same boundary conditions all over 
this region are empirically indistinguishable. Electrons and 
protons, in particular, are only known by their effects else- 
where, and so long as these effects are unchanged we may alter 
our views of electrons and protons as much as we please without 



ELECTRONS AND PROTONS 


29 


making a difference in anything verifiable. The question of 
the validity of the inference to things outside ourselves is 
logically quite distinct from the question whether the stuff of 
the world is mental, material, or neutral. I might be a solip- 
sist, and hold at the same time that I am my body; I might, 
conversely, allow inferences to things other than myself, but 
maintain that these things were minds or mental events. In 
physics, the question is not that of solipsism, but the much 
more definite question: Given the physical conditions at the 
bounding surface of some volume, without any direct know- 
ledge of the interior, how much can we legitimately infer as to 
what happens in the interior ? Is there good ground for sup- 
posing that we can infer as much as physicists usually assume ? 
Or can we perhaps infer much less than is generally supposed ? 
I do not propose as yet to attempt an answer to this question; 
I have raised it at this stage in order to suggest a doubt as 
to the completeness of our knowledge concerning the structure 
of the atom. 



CHAPTER IV 

THE THEORY OF QUANTA 

The atomicity of matter is a h5rpothesis as old as the Greeks, 
and in no way repugnant to our mental habits. The theory 
that matter is composed of electrons and protons is beautiful 
through its successful simplicity, but is not difficult to imagine 
or believe. It is otherwise with the form of atomicity intro- 
duced by the theory of quanta. This might possibly not have 
surprised Pythagoras, but it would most certainly have aston- 
ished every later man of science, as it has astonished those 
of our own day. It is necessary to understand the general 
principles of the theory before attempting a modern philo- 
sophy of matter; but unfortunately there are still unsolved 
physical problems connected with it, which make it improbable 
that a satisfactory philosophy of the subject can yet be con- 
structed. Nevertheless, we must do what we can. 

As everyone knows, the quantum was first introduced by 
Planck in 1900 in his study of black-body radiation. Planck 
showed that, when we consider the vibrations which con- 
stitute the heat in a body, these are not distributed among all 
possible values according to the usual law of frequency which 
governs chance distributions, but on the contrary are tied down 
by a certain law. If t is the energy of a vibration, and v its 
frequency, then there is a certain constant h* known as 
Planck’s constant, such that t/v is h, or 2h, or 3A, or some 
other small integral multiple of k. Vibrations with other 
amounts of energy do not occur. No reason is known for their 
non-occurrence, which remains so far of the nature of a brute 

• The numerical value of A is 6-55 x 10 - erg secs., and its dimen- 
sions are those of “ action ” — i.e., energy xtime. 



THE THEORY OF QUANTA 31 

fact. At first, it was an isolated fact. But now Planck’s 
constant has been found to be involved in various other kinds 
of phenomena; in fact, wherever observation is sufficiently 
minute to make it possible to discover whether it is involved 
or not. 

A second field for the quantum theory was found in the 
photo-electric effect. This effect is described as follows by 
Jeans;* 

" The general features of the phenomenon are well known. 
For some time it has been known that the incidence of high- 
frequency light on to the surface of a negatively charged con- 
ductor tended to precipitate a discharge, while Hertz showed 
that the incidence of the light on an uncharged conductor 
resulted in its acquiring a positive charge. These phenomena 
have been shown quite conclusively to depend on the emission 
of electrons from the surface of the metal, the electrons being 
set free in some way by the incidence of the light. 

“ In any particular experiment, the velocities with which 
individual electrons leave the metal have all values from zero 
up to a certain maximum velocity v, which depends on the 
conditions of the particular experiment. No electron is found 
to leave the metal with a velocity greater than this maximum 
V. It seems probable that in any one experiment all the elec- 
trons are initially shot off with the same velocity v, but that 
those which come from a small distance below the surface lose 
part of their velocity in fighting their way out to the surface. 

“ Leaving out of account such disturbing influences as films 
of impurities on the metallic surface, it appears to be a general 
law that the maximum velocity v depends only on the nature of 
the metal and on the frequency of the incident light. It does 
not depend on the intensity of the light, and within the range 
of temperature within which experiments are possible it does 
not depend on the temperature of the metal. . . . For a given 
metal this maximum velocity increases regularly as the fre- 
quency of the light is increased, but there is a certain frequency 
below which no emission takes place at all.” 

• Report on Radiation and the Quantum Theory, Physical Society of 
London, 1914, p. 58. 



32 THE THEORY OF QUANTA 

The explanation of this phenomenon in terms of the quantum 
was first given by Einstein* in 1905. When light of frequency 
V falls on the conductor, it is found that the amount of energy 
absorbed by an electron which the light separates from its 
atom is about five-sixths of hv, where v is Planck’s constant. 
It may be supposed that the other one-sixth is absorbed by the 
atom, so that atom and electron together absorb exactly one 
quantum h. When the light is of such low frequency that 
hv is not enough to liberate an electron, the photo-electric 
effect does not take place. Explanations not involving the 
quantum have been attempted,'but none seem able to account 
for the data. 

Another field in w'hich the quantum hypothesis has been 
found necessary is the specific heat of solids at low tempera- 
tures. According to previous theories, the specific heat (at 
constant volume) multiplied by the atomic weight ought to 
have the constant value 5*95. In fact, this is found to be very 
approx ima tel}' correct for high temperatures, but for low 
temperatures there is a falling off which increases as the 
temperature falls. The explanation of this fact offered by 
Debye is closely analogous to Planck’s explanation of the facts 
of black-body radiation; and as in that case, it seems definitely 
impossible to obtain a satisfactory theory without invoking 
the quantum. t 

The most interesting application of quantum theory is 
Bohr’s explanation of the line spectra of elements . It had been 
found empirically that the lines in the hydrogen spectrum 
which were known had frequencies obtained from the differ- 
ence of two " terms,” according to the formula; 



where v is the frequency, R is “ Rydberg’s constant,” n and k 

* Annalen der Physik, vol. xvii., p. 146. 
t See Jeans, loc. cit., chap. vi. 



THE THEORY OF QUANTA 


33 


are small integers, and ^ are what are called “ terms.” 

After the formula had been discovered, new lines agreeing with 
it were sought and foimd. Certain lines formerly attributed to 
hydrogen, and not agreeing with the above formula, were 
attributed by Bohr to ionized helium; they are given by the 
formula : 

Bohr’s theoretical grounds for attributing these lines to 
helium were afterwards confirmed experimentally by Fowler. 
It will be seen that they fit into the formula (i) when 4R is 
substituted for R, a fact which Bohr's theory explains, as well 
as the more delicate fact that, to make the formula exact, we 
have to substitute, not exactly 4i?, but a slightly smaller 
quantity. 

The form of the equation (i) suggested to Bohr that a line 
of the hydrogen spectrum is not to be regarded as something 
which the atom emits when it is in a state of periodic vibration, 
but as produced by a change from a state connected with one 
integer to a state connected with another. This would be 
explained if the orbit of the electron were not just any orbit 
possible on Newtonian principles, but only an orbit connected 
with an integral “ quantum number ” — i.e. with a multiple 
of h. 

The way in which Bohr achieved a theory on these lines is as 
follows. He supposed that the electron can only revolve 
round the nucleus in certain circles, these being such that, if 
p is the moment of momentum in any orbit, we shall have; 

2np=> nh (2), 

where h is, as always, Planck’s constant, and « is a small whole 
number. (In theory n might be any whole number, but in 

3 



34 


THE THEORY OF QUANTA 


practice it is never found to be much larger than 30, and that 
only in certain very tenuous nebulae.) The reason why the 
quantum principle assumes just this form will be explained 
presently. 

Now if m is the maiss of the electron, a the radius of its orbit, 
and o) its angular velocity, we have; 

P=ma*o}. 

Hence 23 ima*(o—nh (3). 

But, on grounds of the usual theory, since the radiail accelera- 
tion of the electron is aw* and the force attracting it to the 
nucleus is e*/a*, we have: 

maw*=e‘/a*. 

l.e. ’ ma*€i>*—e* {4). 

From equations (3) and (4) we obtaiin: 

n*h* 8 n*me* , . 

n»A» ^5)- 


The possible orbits for the electron are obtained by putting 
«= I, 2, 3, 4, . . . in the above formulae for a. Thus the 
smallest possible orbit is: 


h* 


( 6 ): 


and the other possible orbits au-e 401, qai, i6aj, etc. 

For the energy in an orbit of radius «*«! we have, since the 
potential energy is double the kinetic energy with its sign 
chainged:* 


1 , , 2n*me* 


in virtue of (5). Thus when the electron faJls from an orbit 
whose radius is k*ai to one whose radius is n*ai {k>n), there 
is a loss of energy: 

!in*m e* /i 

h* \n* W* 


See Sommerield, Atomic Structure and Spectral Lines, pp. 547 fi. 



THE THEORY OF QUANTA 


35 


It is assumed that this energy is radiated out in a light- 
wave whose energy is one quantum of energy hv, where r 
is its frequency. Hence we obtain the frequency of the emitted 
light by the equation: 


hv 


2 n*me* 

2n*tne^ 



This agrees exactly with the observed lines if [see 
equation (i)]: 


where R is Rydberg’s constant. On inserting numerical 
values, it is foimd that this equation is verified. This striking 
success was, from the first, a powerful argument in favour of 
Bohr’s theory. 

Bohr’s theory has been generalized by Wilson* and Sommer- 
feld so as to allow also elliptic orbits: these have two quantum 
numbers, one corresponding, as before, to angular momentum 
or the moment of momentum (which is constant, by Kepler’s 
second law), the other depending upon the eccentricity. Only 
certain eccentricities are possible; in fact, the ratio of the 
minor to the major axis is always rational, and has as its 
denominator the quantum number corresponding to the 
moment of momentum. In order to explain the Zeeman effect 
(which arises in a magnetic field) we used a third quantum 
number, corresponding to the angle between the plane of the 
magnetic field and the plane of the electron’s orbit. In all 
cases, however, there is a general principle, which miist now 
be explained. This will show, also, why, in Bohr’s theory, 
the quantum equation (2) takes the form it does.t 

* W. Wilson, The Quantum Theory of Radiation and Line Spectra 
Phil. Mag., June, 1915. 

t What follows is taken from Note 7 (pp. 555 £E.) in Sommerfeld’s 
Atomic Structure and Spectral Lines, translated from the third German 
edition by Henry L. Brose, M.A., 19*3. See also Note 4 (pp. 541 ff.). 



36 


THE THEORY OF QUANTA 


The first thing to observe is that the quantum principle is 
really concerned with atoms of action, not of energy: action is 
energy multiplied by time. Suppose now that we have a system 
depending upon several co-ordinates, and periodic in respect 
of each. It is not necessary to suppose that each co-ordinate 
has the same period: it is only necessary to suppose that the 
system is “ conditionally periodic ” — i.e. that each co-ordinate 
separately is periodic. We must further assume that our co- 
ordinates are so chosen as to allow “ separation of variables " 
(as to which, see Sommerfeld, op. cit., pp. 559-60). We then 
define the " momentum ” (in a generalized sense) associated 
with the co-ordinate as the partial differential of the kinetic 
energy with respect to — i.e. calling the generalized 
momentum p^, we put : 



where E^^ is the kinetic energy. The quantum condition is 
to apply to the integral of over a complete period of — 
i.e. we are to have: 

j Pt^gk^n^h, 

where the integration is taken through one complete period 
of qjf. Here Wj will be the quantum number associated with 
the co-ordinate ft. The above is a general formula of which all 
known cases of quantum phenomena are special cases. This 
is its sole justification. 

The above principle is exceedingly complicated — more so, 
even, than it appears in our summary account, which has 
omitted various difficulties. It is possible that its complica- 
tion may be due to the fact that quantum dynamics has had 
to force its way through the obstacles which the classical 
system put in its way; it is possible also that quantum pheno- 
mena may turn out to be deducible from classical principles. 
But before pursuing this line of thought, it may be well to say 



THE THEORY OF QUANTA 37 

a few words about the developments of Bohr's theory by 
Sommerfeld and others. 

In its original form, in which circular orbits were assumed, 
Bohr's theory accounted for the main facts concerning the 
line spectra of hydrogen and ionized heliiun. But there were 
a number of more delicate facts which required the hypo- 
thesis of elliptic orbits: with this h5q)othesis, together with 
some niceties derived from relativity, the most minute agree- 
ment has been obtained between theory and observation. 
But perhaps this great success has made people think that more 
was proved than really was proved. The great advantage 
obtained from admitting elliptic orbits is that they provide 
a second quantum number. In the emission of light by atoms , 
what we have is essentially as follows. The atom is capable 
of various states, characterized by whole numbers (the quantum 
numbers). There may be more or fewer quantmn numbers, 
according to the degrees of freedom of the system. The loss 
or gain of energy when an atom passes from a state character- 
ized by one set of values of the quantum numbers to a state 
characterized by another set is known. When energy is lost 
(without the loss of an electron or of any part of the nucleus of 
the atom), it passes out as a light-wave, whose energy is equal 
to what the atom has lost, and whose energy multiplied by 
the time of one vibration is h. Energy is what is conserved, 
but action is what is quantized. 

Let us revert, in illustration, to the circular orbits of Bohr's 
original theory, which remain possible, though not universal, 
in the newer theory. If we call the kinetic energy when 
the electron is in the smallest possible orbit, the kinetic 

energy in the n“ orbit is (The measure of the total 

energy is the kinetic energy with its sign changed.) We do 
not know what determines the electron to jump from one orbit 
to another; on this point, our knowledge is merely statistical. 



38 THE THEORY OF QUANTA 

We know, of course, that when the atom is not in a position 
to absorb energy the electron can only jump from a larger to 
a smaper orbit, while the converse jump occurs when the 
atom absorbs energy from incident light. We know also, 
from the comparative intensities of different lines in the 
spectrum, the comparative frequencies of different possible 
jumps, and on this subject a theory exists. But we do not 
know in the least why, of a number of atoms whose electrons 
are not in minimum orbits, some jump at one time and some 
at another, just as we do not know why some atoms of radio- 
active substances break down while others do not. Nature 
seems to be full of revolutionary occurrences as to which we 
can say that, if they take place, they will be of one of several 
possible kinds, but we cannot say that they will take place at 
all, or, if they will, at what time. So far as quantum theory 
can say at present, atoms might as well be possessed of free 
will, limited, however, to one of several possible choices.* 

However this may be, it is clear that what we know is the 
changes of energy when an atom emits light, and we know that 
in the case of hydrogen or ionized helium these changes are 

measured by It seems almost unavoidable to infer 

that the previous state of the atom was characterized by the 
integer k and the later one by the integer n. But to assume 
orbits and so on, though proper as a help to the imagination, 
is hardly sufficiently justified by the analogy of large-scale 
processes, since the quantum principle itself shows the danger 
of relying upon this analogy. In large-scale occurrences 
there is nothing to suggest the quantum, and perhaps other 
familiar features of such occurrences may result merely from 
statistical averaging. 

• This, however, is probably a temporary state of affairs. Certain 
Pasons for quantum transitions are already known. See J . Franck and 
P. Jordan, Anregung von Quantms^ungen dutch Stosse, Berlin, 1926; 
also P. Jordan, KausalUdt und Statistih in der modernen Physih, 
Naturwissenschaften, Feb. 4, 2927. 



THE THEORY OF QUANTA 


39 


It may be worth while to consider briefly the elliptical 
orbits which are possible.* This will also illustrate the appli- 
cation of the quantum principle to systems with more than one 
co-ordinate. 

Taking polar co-ordinates, the kinetic energy is: 

\m{r*+r*b*). \ 

The two generalized momenta are therefore: ^ 

¦J' 

pa = mr*d, pf=mr. ^ 

We have thus two quantum conditions : 

I 2mr*6dd=nh 
and J® 

I tnrdr —n'h. 

Jo-0 


By Kepler’s second law, tnr*d is constant; call it p. Thus: 
2np=nh. 

The other integration is more troublesome, but we arrive at 
the result that, if a and b are the major and minor axes of the 
eUipse, a-bn\ 

a n 

A little further calculation leads to the result that the energy 
in the orbit which has the quantum numbers n, «' is : 

2 n*me* i 
A* ' (n +n')*’ 

This is exactly the same as in the case of circular orbits, except 
that n +n' replaces «. If this were all, the line spectrum of 
hydrogen would be exactly the same whether elliptic orbits 
occurred or not, and there would be no empirical means of 
deciding the question. 

However, by introducing considerations derived from the 
special theory of relativity we are able to distinguish between 
the results to be expected from circular and elliptic orbits 
• See Sommerfeld, op. cit., pp. 232 fi. 



4 ° 


THE THEORY OF QUANTA 


respectively, and to show that the latter must occur to account 
for observed facts. The crucial point is the variation of mass 
with velocity : the faster a body is moving, the greater is its 
mass. Therefore in an elliptic orbit the electron will have a 
greater mass at the perihelion than at the aphelion. From 
this it is found to follow that an elliptic orbit will not be 
accurately elliptic, but that the perihelion will advance 
slightly with each revolution.* That is to say, taking polar 
co-ordinates r, 0, the co-ordinate 0 increases by slightly more 
than 731 between one minimum of r and the next. The system 
is thus " conditionally periodic ” — i.e. each separate co- 
ordinate changes periodically, but the periods of the two do 

not coincide. The resultf is that the equation ^ — ^ is 

replaced by: 

a-b n' 
a ~tty’ 



c being the velocity of light, and p, as before, the angular 
momentum. It will be seen that y is very nearly i, because 
c is large. 

The formula for the energy associated with the quantum 
numbers n, «' now becomes much more complicated; its great 
merit is that it accotmts for the fine structure of the hydrogen 
line spectrum. It must be felt that this minuteness of agree- 
ment between theory and observation is very remarkable. 
But it is still the case that the only empirical evidence concerns 
differences of energy in coimection with different quantum 
numbers, and that the theory of actual orbits, proceeding, 
during steady motion, according to Newtonian principles, 
must inevitably remain a hypothesis — a hypothesis which, 

• This is not the same phenomenon as in the case of the orbit of 
Mercury. The latter depends upon the general theory of relativity, 
the fomrer upon the special theory. 

t Sommerield, op. ctt., pp. 467 ff. 



THE THEORY OF QUANTA 41 

as we shall see, has disappeared from the latest form of the 
quantum theory. 

The fact of the existence of the quantum is as strange as it 
is undeniable, unless it should turn out to be deducible from 
classical principles. It seems to be the case that quantum 
principles regulate all interchange of energy between matter 
and the surrounding medium. There are grave difiBiculties 
in reconciling the quantum theory with the imdulatory theory 
of light, but we shall not consider these \mtil a later stage. 
What is much to be wished is some way of formulating the 
quantum principle which shall be less strange and ad hoc 
than that due to Wilson and Sommerfeld. For practical pur- 
poses, it amoimts to something like this: that a periodic 
process of frequency v has an amount of energy which is a 
multiple of kv, and, conversely, if a given amount of energy is 
expended in starting a periodic process, it will start a process 
with a frequency v such that the given amount of energy shall 
be a multiple of h». When a process has a frequency v and an 
energy hv, the amount of “ action ” during one period is A. 
But we cannot say: In any periodic process the amount of 
action in one period is A or a multiple of A. Nevertheless, 
some formulation analogous to this might in time turn out 
to be possible. As has appeared from the theory of relativity, 
" action " is more fundamental than energy in physical theory ; 
it is therefore perhaps not surprising that action should be 
found to play an important part. But the whole theory of the 
interaction of matter and the surrounding medium, at present, 
rests upon the conservation of energy. Perhaps a theory 
giving more prominence to action may be possible, and may 
facilitate a simpler statement of the quantum principle. 

In Bohr’s theory and its developments, there is a lacuna 
and there is a difficulty. The lacuna has already been men- 
tioned: we do not know in the least why an electron chooses 
one moment rather than another to jump from a larger to a 



42 


THE THEORY OF QUANTA 


smaller orbit. The difficulty is that the jump is usually 
regarded as sudden and discontinuous: it is suggested 
that if it were continuous, the experimental facts in the 
regions concerned would become inexplicable. Possibly 
this difficulty may be overcome, and it may be found that 
the transition from one orbit to another cam be continuous. 
But it is as well to consider the other possibility, that the 
transition is really discontinuous. I have emphasized how 
little we readly know about what goes on in the atom, because 
I wished to keep open the possibility of something quite dif- 
ferent from what is usually supposed. Have we any good 
reason for thinking that space-time is continuous ? Do we 
know that, between one orbit and the next, other orbits are 
geometrically possible ? Einstein has led us to think that the 
neighbourhood of matter makes space non-Euclidean ; might it 
not also make it discontinuous ? It is certainly rash to assume 
that the minute structure of the world resembles that which 
is found to suit large-scale phenomena, which may be only 
statistical averages. These considerations may serve as an 
introduction to the most modem theory of quantum mechanics , 
to which we must now turn our attention.* 

In the new theory inaugurated by Heisenberg, we no longer 
have the simplicity of the Rutherford-Bohr atom, in which 
electrons revolve about a nucleus like separate planets. 

• The principal papers setting forth this theory are; 

1. W. Heisenberg, Ueber quantentheorelische Vmdevtung kinematiscker 
und mechanischer Benehungen. Zeitschrift fOr Physik, 33, pp. 879-893, 

1925- 

2. M. Bom and F. Jordan, Zur Quantenmechanik. Ibid. 34, pp. 858- 
888, 1925. 

3. M. Bom, W. Heisenberg, and P. Jordan, Zur Quantenmeckanih II. 
Ibtd.yi, pp. 557-615. 1926. 

4. P. A. M. Dirac, The Fundamental Equations of Quantum Mechanics. 
Proc. Royal Soc., Series A, vol. 109, No. A752, pp. 642-653, 1925. 

5. W. Heisenb^g, Ueber quantentheoretische Ktnematih und Mechanih. 
Matbematische Annalen, 95, pp. 683-705, 1926. 

6. W. Heisenberg, Quantenmechanik. Naturwissenschaften, 14 Jahr- 
gang, Heft 45, pp. 989-994- 

I shall quote these papers by the above nu mbers. I am much indebted 
in this matter to Mr R. H. Fowler, F.R.S. 



THE THEORY OF QUANTA 43 

Heisenberg points out that in this theory there are many 
quantities which are not even theoretically observable — 
namely, those representing processes supposed to be occurring 
while the atom is in a steady state. In the new theory, as 
Dirac says: “The variable quantities associated with a 
stationary state on Bohr’s theory, the amplitudes and fre- 
quencies of orbital motion, have no physical meaning and are 
of no physical importance ” (4, p. 652). Heisenberg, in first 
introducing his theory, pointed out that the ordinary quantum 
theory uses unobservable quantities, such as the position and 
time of revolution of an electron (i, p. 879), and that the 
electron ought to be represented by measurable quantities 
such as the frequencies of its radiation (i, p. 880). Now the 
observable frequencies are always differences between two 
“ terms,” each of which is represented by an integer. We 
thus arrive at a representation of the state of an atom by 
means of an infinite array of numbers — i.e. by a matrix. 
If and r* are two “ terms,” an observable frequency (in 
theory) is v^, where: 

v^=T^-T^. 

It is such numbers as v„„ (of which there is a doubly infinite 
series) that characterize the atom, so far as it is observable. 

Heisenberg sets out this view as follows (5, p. 685). In the 
classical theory, given an electron with one degree of freedom, 
in harmonic oscillation, the elongation x at time t can be 
represented by a Fourier series: 

x=x{n, f)=.rx(«),.«2-<'<»)-" ‘, 

where « is a constant and x is the number of the harmonic. 
The single terms of this series, namely: 

would contain the quantities which have been signalized as 
directly observable — ^namely, frequency, amplitude, and phase. 



44 


THE THEORY OF QUANTA 


But in virtue of the fact that, in atoms, frequencies eire found 
to be the differences of " terms,” we shall have to replace the 
above by: 

and the collection (not the sum) of such terms represents what 
was formerly the elongation x. The sum of all these terms 
has no longer any physical significance. Thus the atom comes 
to be represented by the numbers »(«»»), arranged in an 
infinite rectangle or “ matrix.” 

It is possible to construct an algebra of matrices, which 
differs formally from ordinary algebra in only one respect, 
namely, that multiplication is not commutative. 

A new operation is defined which, when the quantum 
numbers become large, approximates to differentiation. By 
using this operation, Hamilton’s equations of motion can be 
preserved in a form which is applicable equally to periodic 
and to unperiodic motions, so that it is no longer necessary 
to distinguish a certain sphere of quantum phenomena, to 
which different laws are applied from those applied to the 
phenomena amenable to classical d)mamics: “A distinction 
between ‘ quantized ’ and ‘ unquantized ’ motions loses all 
meaning in this theory, since in it there is no question of a 
quantum condition which selects certain motions from a great 
number of possible ones ; in place of this condition appears a 
quantum-mechanical fundamental equation . . . which is valid 
for all possible motions, and is necessary in order to give a 
definite meaning to the problem of motion ” (3, p. 558). The 
fundamental equation alluded to in the above is as follows: 
Let 5 be a Hamiltonian co-ordinate, and p the corresponding 
(generalized) momentum, both being matrices. It will be 
remembered that multiplication is not commutative for 
matrices; in fact, we have as the fundamental equation in 
question (2, p. 871) : ^ 



THE THEORY OF QUANTA 45 

where i represents the matrix whose diagonal consists of 
I’s, and whose other terms are all zero. The above is the sole 
fundamental equation containing h (Planck’s constant), and 
it is true for cdl motions. 

Heisenberg does not claim that the new theory solves all 
difficulties. On the contrary, he says {5, p. 705) : 

" The theory here described must be regarded as still in- 
complete. The real geometrical or kinematical meaning of the 
fundamental assumption (5)* has not yet been made com- 
pletely dear. In particular, there is a serious difficulty in the 
fact that the time apparently has a different role from the 
space co-ordinates, and is fonnally differently treated. The 
formal character of the time co-ordinate in the mathematical 
structure of the theory is made particularly evident by the 
fact that in the theory hitherto the question of the temporal 
course of a process has no immediate meaning, and that the 
concept of earlier and later can hardly be defined exactly. 
Nevertheless, we need not consider these difficulties as an objec- 
tion to the theory, since the appearance of just such difficulties 
was to be expected from the nature of the space-time relations 
that hold for atomic systems.” 

In a more or less popular exposition (6), Heisenberg has set 
forth some of the consequences of his theory. Electrons and 
atoms, he says, do not have “ the degree of immediate reality 
of objects of sense,” but only the sort of reality which one 
naturally ciscribes to light quanta. The troubles of the quan- 
tum theory have come, he thinks, from trying to make 
models of atoms and picture them as in ordinary space. If 
we are to retain the corpuscular theory, we can only do it by 
not assigning a definite point of space at each time to the 
electron or atom. We substitute a well-defined physical group 
of quantities which represent what was the place of the electron. 

* This is the assumption, mentioned above, that an atom or electron 
at time t can be represented by a collection of terms of the form ; 



46 


THE THEORY OF QUANTA 


They are the observable radiation quantities, each of which 
is associated with two “ terms,” so that we obtain a matrix. 
The distinction of inner and outer electrons in an atom becomes 
meaningless. ” It is, moreover, in principle impossible to 
identify again a particular corpuscle among a series of similar 
corpuscles ” (p. 993). 

The matrix theory of the electron is too new to be amenable, 
as yet, to the kind of logical analysis which it is our purpose 
to undertake in this Part. It is clear, however, that it affects 
a scientific economy by substituting for the merely hypo- 
thetical steady motions of Bohr’s atoms a set of quantities 
representing what we really know — namely, the radiations that 
come out of the region in which the atom is supposed to be. 
It is clear, also, that there is an immense logical progress in 
the construction of a djmamic which destroys the distinction 
between quantized and unquantized motions, and treats all 
motions by means of a uniform set of principles. And the 
greater abstractness of the Heisenberg atom as compared with 
the Bohr atom makes it logically preferable, since the pictorial 
elements in a physical theory are those upon which least 
reliance can be placed. 

An apparently different quantum theory, due to de Broglie* 
and Schr6dinger,t has been found to be formally the 
same as Heisinger’s theory, although at first sight very 
different. This is described by de Broglie as " the new 
wave theory of matter,” in which ” the material point 
is conceived as a singularity in a wave.”! Here, also, the 
radiations which we think of as coming out of the atom have 
more physical “ reality ” than the atom itself. One of the 
merits of the theory is that it diminishes the difficulties hitherto 

* Annates de Physique, 3, 22, 1925. 

t Annalen der Pkysik, 1926. Four papers, 79, pp. 361, 489, 734: 
80, p. 437. 

t Nature, Sp. 23, 1926, p. 441. See also Fowler, "Matrix and 
Wave Mechanics," ib. Feb. 12, 1927. 



THE THEORY OF QUANTA 47 

existing in the way of a reconciliation of the facts of interfer- 
ence and dispersion with the facts which led to the h5^othesis 
of light quanta. 

Meanwhile, there remains the possibihty that all the 
quantum phenomena may be deducible from classical prin- 
ciples, and that the apparent discontinuities may be only a 
question of sharp maxima or minima. The most successful 
theory known to me on these lines is that of L. V. King.* He 
assumes that electrons rotate with a certain fixed angular 
velocity, the same for all; he makes a similar assumption as 
regards protons. Consequently there is a magnetic field 
which introduces conditions that are absent if electrons and 
protons have no spin . There will be electromagnetic radiation 
of frequency v, where: 

/»= 

h being Planck’s constant, m, the invariant mass of the 
electron, and v its velocity. (The identity of h with Planck’s 
constant is obtained by adjusting the hypothetical constants.) 
From this formula he deduces many of the phenomena upon 
which the quantum theory is based, and promises to deduce 
others in a later paper. An article by Mr R. H. Fowler 
(“Spinning Electrons,” Nature, Jan. 15, 1927) discusses 
Mr King’s theory without arriving at a verdict for or 
against. Presumably it will not be long before a definite 
answer as to the adequacy of Mr King’s theory is 
possible. If it is adequate, the quantum theory ceases 
to concern the philosopher, since what remains valid in 
it becomes a deduction from more fundamental laws and 
processes which are continuous and involve no atomicity of 
action. For the moment, until the physicists have arrived 
at a decision, the philosopher must be content to investigate 
both hypotheses impartially. 

• Gyromagnefic Electrons and a Classical Theory of Atomic Structure 
and Radiation. By Louis Vessot King, F.R.S., Macdonald Professor 
of Physics, McGill University. Louis Carrier, Mercury Press, 1926. 



CHAPTER V 

THE SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 
The theory of relativity has resulted from a combination of 
the three elements which were called for in a reconstruction of 
physics: first, delicate experiment; secondly, logical analysis; 
and thirdly, epistemological considerations. These last played 
a greater part in the early stages of the theory than in its 
finished form, and perhaps this is fortimate, since their scope 
and validity may be open to question, or at least would be 
but for the successes to which they have led. One may say, 
broadly, that relativity, like earlier physics, has assumed 
that when different observers are doing what is called 
" observing the same phenomenon,” those respects in which 
their observations differ do not belong to the phenomenon, 
but only those respects in which their observations agree. 
This is a principle which common sense teaches at an early 
age. A young child, seeing a ship sailing away, thinks that the 
ship is continually growing smaller ; but before long he comes 
to recognize that the diminution in size is only " apparent,” 
and that the ship " really ” remains of the same size through- 
out its voyage. In so far as relativity has been inspired by 
epistemological considerations, they have been of this common- 
sense kind, and the apparent paradoxes have resulted from 
the discovery of unexpected differences between our observa- 
tions and those of other hypothetical observers. Relativity 
physics, like all physics, assumes the realistic hypothesis, 
that there are occurrences which different people can observe. 
For the present, we may ignore epistemology, and proceed to 
consider relativity simply as theoretical physics. We may also 
ignore the experimental evidence, and regard the whole theory 

48 



THE SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 


49 


as a deductive system, since that is the point of view with 
which we are concerned in Part I. 

The most remarkable feature of the theory of relativity, 
from a philosopher’s standpoint, was already present in the 
special theory : I mean the merging of space and time into space- 
time. The special theory has now become only an approxima- 
tion, which is not exactly true in the neighbourhood of matter. 
But it remains worth understanding, as a stage towards the 
general theory. Moreover, it does not demand the abandon- 
ment of nearly such a large proportion of our common-sense 
notions as is discarded by the general theory. 

Technically, the whole of the special theory is contained 
in the Lorentz transformation. This transformation has the 
advantage that it makes the velocity of light the same with 
respect to any two bodies which are moving uniformly rela- 
tively to each other, and, more generally, that it makes the 
laws of electromagnetic phenomena {Maxwell’s equations) 
the same with respect to einy two such bodies. It wais for the 
sake of this advantage that it was originally introduced; but 
it was afterwards found to have wider bearings and a more 
general justification. In fact, it may be said that, given suffi- 
cient logical acumen, it could have been discovered at any 
time after it was known that light is not propagated instan- 
taneously. It has grown by this time very familiar — so 
familiar that I have even seen it quoted (quite correctly) in 
an advertisement of Fortnum and Mason’s. Nevertheless, 
it is, I suppose, desirable to set it forth. In its simplest form 
it is as follows ; 

Suppose two bodies, one of which (S') is moving relatively 
to the other (S) with velocity v parallel to the x-axis. Suppose 
that an observer on S observes an event which he judges to 
have taken place at time f, by his clocks, and in the place whose 
co-ordinates, for him, are x, y, z. (Each observer takes him- 
self as origin.) Suppose that an observer on S' judges that the 

4 



50 


THE SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 


event occurs at time /' and that its co-ordinates are x', y', z' . 
We suppose that at the time when / = o the two observers 
^lre at the same place, and also t'=o. It would formerly 
have seemed axiomatic that we should have t—t'. Both 
observers are supposed to employ faultless chronometers, 
and, of course, to allow for the velocity of light in estimating 
the time when the event occurs. It would be thought, there 
fore, that they would arrive at the same estimate as to the time 
of the occurrence. It would also have been thought that we 
should have : , 


Neither of these, however, is correct. To obtain the correct 
transformation, put: 


where c is, as always, the velocity of light. Then : 

x‘=fi{x-vt) 

M'-S) 


For the other co-ordinates y', z', we still have, as before: 

y=y, z'=r. 

It is the formulae for x' and /' that are peculiar. These formulae 
contain, implicitly, the whole of the special theory of relativity. 

The formula for x' embodies the FitzGerald contraction. 
Lengths on either body, as estimated by an observer on the 
other, will be shorter than as estimated by an observer on the 
body on which the lengths are ; the longer length will have to 
the shorter the ratio /?. More interesting, however, is the 
effect as regards time. Suppose that an observer on the body 
S judges two events at and x, to be simultaneous, and both at 
time t. Then an observer on S' will judge that they occur at 
times L', /«', where: , ^ 



THE SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 


erefore; 


This is not zero unless thus in general events which are 

simultaneous for one observer are not simultaneous for the 
other. We cannot therefore regard space and time as inde- 
pendent, as has always been done in the past. Even the order 
of events in time is not definite: in one system of co-ordinates 
an event A may precede an event B, while in another B may 
precede A. This, however, is only possible if the events are 
so separated that, no matter how we choose our co-ordinates, 
light starting from either could not reach the place of the other 
until after the other had occurred. 

The Loren tz transformation yields the result that: 


Since y =y' and z =z', we have: 

(x* +y*+z*) = cH'*- (x'*+y'*+z'*); 


or, putting r, r' for the distances of the event from the two 
observers : 

c*t*-r*=c*t'*-r'* (2). 


This result is general — i.e. given any two reference-bodies in 
uniform relative motion, if r is the distance between two events 
according to one system, r' the distance according to the other, 
and if /, t' are the corresponding time-intervals between the 
events, equation (2) will always hold. Thus c*/* - r* represents 
a physical quantity, independent of the choice of co-ordinates; 
it is called the square of the “ interval ” between the two 
events. There are two cases, according as it is positive or 
negative. When it is positive, the interval between the events 
is called *' time-like when negative, “ space-like.” In the 
intermediate case in which it is zero, the events are such that 
one light-ray can be present at each. In this case, one event 
might be the seeing of the other. The time-order of two events 



52 THE SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 

will be different in different reference-systems when their 
interval is space-like, but when it is time-like the time-order 
is the same in all systems, though the magnitude of the time- 
interval varies. 

When the interval between two events is time-like, it is 
possible for a body to move in such a way as to be present at 
both events. In that case, the interval is what clocks on that 
body will show as the time. When the interval between two 
events is space-like, it is possible for a body to move in such a 
way that, by its clocks, the two events will be simultaneous; 
in that case, the interval is what, in relation to that body, 
appears as their distance. (In these remarks, we are taking 
the velocity of light as the unit of velocity, which is convenient 
in relativity theory.) Both these are consequences of the 
Lorentz transformation. From the first of them it follows 
that, if two events both happen to me, the time between them 
as measured by my watch (assuming it to be a good watch) is 
the “ interval ” between them, and has still a physical signifi- 
cance. Thus the time that is concerned in psychology is vm- 
affected by relativity, assuming that everything that psycho- 
logy is concerned with happens, from a physical point of view, 
in the body of the person whose mental events are being 
considered. This is an assumption for which grounds will be 
given at a later stage. 

It follows from the ambiguity of simultaneity between 
distant events that we cannot speak unambiguously of " the 
distance between two bodies at a given time.” If the two 
bodies are in relative motion, a “ given time ” will be different 
for the two bodies and different again for other reference- 
bodies. It follows that such a conception cannot enter into 
the correct statement of a physical law. On this ground alone, 
we can conclude that the Newtonian form of the law of gravita- 
tion cannot be quite right. Fortunately, Einstein has supplied 
the necessary correction. 



THE SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 


53 


It will be observed that, as a consequence of the Lorentz 
transformation, the mass of a body will not be the same when 
it is in motion relatively to the reference-body as when it is at 
rest relatively to it. The mass of a body is inversely propor- 
tional to the acceleration produced in it by a given force, and 
two reference-bodies in uniform relative motion will give 
different results for the acceleration of a third body. This is 
obvious as a consequence of the FitzGerald contraction. The 
increase of mass with rapid motion was known experimentally 
before the special theory of relativity had explained it; it is 
very marked for velocities such as those attained by ^-particles 
(electrons) emitted by radio-active bodies, since these velocities 
may be as great as 99 per cent, of the velocity of light. This 
change of mass, like the FitzGerald contraction, seemed 
strange and anomalous until the special theory of relativity 
explained it. 

One more point is important as showing how easily what 
seems axiomatic may be false ; it concerns the composition of 
velocities. Suppose three bodies moving imiformly in the 
same direction: the velocity of the second relatively to the 
first is V, that of the third relatively to the second is w. What 
is the velocity of the third relatively to the first ? One would 
have thought it must be v +ze', but in fact it is: 


It will be seen that this ^ c; if i;=c or «<=(:, it is c, otherwise 
it is less than c. This is an illustration of the way in which 
the velocity of light plays the part of infinity in relation to 
material motions. 

The special theory set itself the task of making the laws of 
physics the same relatively to any two co-ordinate systems in 
imiform rectilinear relative motion. There were two sets of 
equations to be considered: those of Newtonian d3mamics. 



54 


THE SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 


and Maxwell’s equations. The latter are unaltered by a 
Lorentz transformation, but the former require certain adapta- 
tions. These, however, are such as experimental results had 
already suggested. Thus the solution of the problem in hand 
was complete, but of course it was obvious from the first that 
the real problem was more general. There could be no reason 
for confining ourselves to two co-ordinate systems in uniform 
rectilinear motion ; the problem ought to be solved for any two 
co-ordinate S3^tems, no matter what the nature of their rela- 
tive motion. This is the problem which has been solved by 
the general theory of relativity. 



CHAPTER VI 

THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 
The general theory of relativity has a much wider sweep than 
the special theory, and a greater philosophical interest, apart 
from the one matter of the substitution of space-time for space 
and time. The general theory demands an abandonment of 
all direct relations between distant events, the relations upon 
which space-time depends being primarily confined to very 
small regions, and only extended, where they can be extended, 
by means of integration. All the old apparatus of geometry 
— straight lines, circles, ellipses, etc. — is gone. What belongs 
to analysis situs remains, with certain modifications; and 
there is a new geometry of geodesics, which has come from 
Gauss’s study of surfaces by way of Riemann’s inaugural 
dissertation. Geometry and physics are no longer distinct, 
so long as we are not considering the parts of physics which 
introduce atomicity, such as electrons, protons, and quanta. 
Perhaps even this exception may not long remain. There axe 
parts of physics which, so far, lie outside the general theory of 
relativity, but there are no parts of physics to which it is not 
in some degree relevant. And its importance to philosophy 
is perhaps even greater than its importance to ph3raics. It 
has, of course, been seized upon by philosophers of different 
schools as affording support to their respective nostrums; 
St. Thomas, Kant, and Hegel are claimed to have anticipated 
it. But I do not think that any of the philosophers who make 
these suggestions have taken the trouble to imderstand the 
theory. For my part, I do not profess to know exactly what 
its philosophical consequences will prove to be, but I am con- 
vinced that they arc far-reaching, and quite different from 
55 



56 THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 

what they seem to philosophers who are ignorant of mathe- 
matics. 

In the present chapter, I wish to consider Einstein’s theory 
without any regard to its philosophical implications, simply as 
a logical system. The system starts by assuming a four- 
dimensional manifold having a definite order. The form 
which this assumption takes is somewhat technical: it is 
assumed that, when we have what might be called an ordinary 
set of co-ordinates — t.g. those which would naturally be 
employed in Newtonian astronomy — there are certain trans- 
formations of these co-ordinates which are legitimate, and 
certain others which are not. Those which are legitimate are 
those which transform infinitesimal distances into infinitesimal 
distances. This means to say that the transformations must 
be continuous. Perhaps what is assumed may be stated as 
follows : Given a set of points /»„ p^, . . . whose co-ordinates 
tend towards a limiting set which is the co-ordinates of a 
point p, then in any new legitimate co-ordinate system those 
points p^, Pi, Pi, ... must have co-ordinates tending to a 
limiting set which is the co-ordinates of /> in the new system. 
This means that certain relations of order among the co- 
ordinates represent properties of the points of space-time, 
and are presupposed in the assignment of co-ordinates. The 
accurate statement of what is involved can only be made in 
terms of limits, but the correct meaning is conveyed by saying 
that neighbouring points must have neighbouring co-ordinates. 
The exact nature of the ordinal presuppositions of a relativistic 
co-ordinate system will occupy us in a later chapter; for 
the present I merely wish to emphasize that the space-time 
manifold, in the general theory of relativity, has an order 
which is not arbitrary, and which is reproduced in any legiti- 
mate co-ordinate system. This order, it is important to reedize, 
is purely ordinal, and does not involve any metrical element. 
Nor is it derivable from the metrical relations of points 



THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 


57 


which are afterwards introduced in the theory — i.e. from 
“ intervals." 

The points of space-time have, of course, no duration as 
well as no spatial extension. It is generally assumed that 
several events may occupy the same point; this is involved 
in the conception of the intersection of world-lines. I think 
it may also be assumed that one event may extend over a 
finite extent of space-time, but on this point the theory is 
silent, so far as I know. I shall myself, in a later chapter, 
deal with the construction of points as systems of events, 
each of which events has a finite extension; this is a subject 
which has been especially treated by Dr Whitehead, but I 
shall suggest a method somewhat different from his. So long 
as we confine ourselves to the theory of relativity, it is not 
necessary to consider whether events have a finite extension, 
though I think it is necessary to assume that two events may 
both occupy the same point of space-time. Even on this, 
however, there is a certain vagueness in the authoritative 
expositions, which is due mainly to the large scale of the 
phenomena with which the theory is principally concerned. 
Sometimes it would seem as if the whole earth counted as a 
point ; certainly one physical laboratory does so in the practice 
of writers on relativity. On occasion. Professor Eddington 
considers an area of 9 x 10** square kilometres to be an 
infinitesimal of the second order. The fact that such a view 
is appropriate in discussions of relativity makes it unnecessary 
to be precise as to what is meant by saying that two events 
occupy the same point, or that two world-lines intersect. For 
the present I shall assume that this is possible in a strict sense ; 
my reasons will be given in a later chapter. 

It is assumed that every point of space-time can have four 
real numbers assigned to it, and conversely that any four real 
numbers (at any rate within certain limits) are the co-ordinates 
of a point. This amounts to the assumption that the number 



58 THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 


of points is 2*<», where «o is the number of finite integers; 
that is to say, the number of points is the number of the 
Cantorian continuiun. Every class of terms is the field 
of various multiple relations which arrange the class in a 
foui-dimeirsvonal continuum — or an n-dimensional continuum, 
for that matter. But we require a little more than this. Of 
all the ways of arranging the points of space-time in a four- 
dimensional continuum, there is only one that has physical 
significance; the others exist only for mathematical logic. 
That means that there must be among points relations deriv- 
able from an empirical basis, which generate a four-dimensional 
continuum. These will be the ordinal relations spoken of in 
the last paragraph but one. We assume, therefore, that these 
ordinal relations generate a continuum, and that co-ordinates 
are so assigned that neighbouring points have neighbouring 
co-ordinates. More exactly the co-ordinates of the limit of 
a set of points are the limits of the co-ordinates of the set. 
This is not a law of nature, but a prescription as to the manner 
in which co-ordinates are assigned. It leaves great latitude, 
but not complete latitude. It allows any system of co- 
ordinates to be replaced by another system in which the new 
co-ordinates are any continuous functions of the old co- 
ordinates, but it excludes discontinuous functions. 

We now assume that any two neighbouring points have a 
metrical relation, called their " interval,” whose square is a 
quadratic function of the differences of their co-ordinates. 
This is a generalization of the theorem of Pythagoras, which 
has come by way of Gauss and Riemann. It will be worth 
while to consider the historical development for a moment. 

By the theorem of Pythagoras, if two points in a plane have 
co-ordinates (x^, y^), (x,, y^, and s is their distance apart : 

s»=(x,-Xi)*-<-(y,-yi)*. 

By an immediately obvious extension, if two points in space 



THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 59 

have co-ordinates Zj), (*j, y*. Zj), their distance apart 

is s, where: 

s*= (zj - zi)* +(y* -yi)* +(za - zi)*- 
If the distance apart is small, we write dx, dy, dz for Zj - z^, 
and is for s; thus: 

is*= dx* +dy* +dz*. 

Gauss considered a problem concerned with surfaces, which 
arises naturally out of the above. On a surface, the position 
of a point can be fixed by two co-ordinates, which need not 
involve reference to anything outside the surface. Thus on 
the earth position is fixed by latitude and longitude. Suppose 
u and V are two such co-ordinates which fix position on a 
surface. Then in general we shall not have: 

ds*—du* ^dv* 

for the distance between neighbouring points; in general, we 
cannot get a formula of this kind however we may define 
M and V. We can get a formula of this kind on a cylinder or 
a cone, and generally on what are called “ developable ” 
surfaces, but not, e.g., on a sphere. The general formula 
takes the shape: 

ds*= Edu* +2Fdudv +Gdv*, 

where E, F, G are in general functions of m and v, not constants. 
Gauss showed that there are certain functions of E, F, G which 
have the same value however the co-ordinates u and v may be 
defined; these fimctions express properties of the surface, 
which can theoretically be discovered by measurements carried 
out on the surface, without reference to external space. 

Riemann extended this method to space. He supposed that 
the theorem of Pythagoras may be not exact, and that the 
correct formula for the distance between two points may be 
such as results from Gauss’s formula by adding another 
variable. He showed that this supposition could be made 
the basis of non-Euclidean geometry. The whole subject of 



6o THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 

non-Eudidean geometry remained, however, without visible 
relevance to ph3rsics imtil it was utilized in Einstein’s theory of 
gravitation, which results from the combination of Riemann's 
ideas with the substitution of space- time " interval ” for dis- 
tance in space and time, which had already been made in the 
special theory of relativity. 

In the special theory of relativity, as we saw, the interval 
between two space-time points, one of which is the origin, 
is s, where: 

s*= +y* +2* - cH*. 

if the interval is space-like, and: 

s*= cH* - X* - y* ~ 2*, 

if the interval is time-like. In practice, the latter form is 
always taken. Any system of co-ordinates allowed by the 
special theory gives the same value for the interval between 
two given space-time points. But we are now allowing much 
greater latitude in the choice of co-ordinates, and we are 
assuming that the special theory represents only an approxima- 
tion, being not strictly true except in the absence of a gravita- 
tional field. We still assume that, for small distances, there 
is a quadratic function of the co-ordinate differences which 
has a physical significance, and has the same value however 
the co-ordinates may be assigned, subject to the condition of 
continuity already explained. That is, if Xj, x^, Xj, x^ are the 
co-ordinates of a point, and x^ -i-ixi, x, -k-dx^, Xj +dx^, x* +dx^ 
are the co-ordinates of a neighbouring point, we assume that 
there is a quadratic fimction: 

rg^xjx, {jt. «'=!. 2, 3, 4), 

which has the same value however the co-ordinates may be 
assigned; we then define ds as the " interval " between the 
two neighbouring points. The will be functions of the 
co-ordinates (in general not constants), and for convenience 
we take g^ — g„^. Just as Gauss was able to deduce the 



THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 6i 

geometry of a surface from his formula, so we can deduce the 
geometry of space-time from our formula. But as we include 
time, our geometry is not merely geometry, but physics; in 
other words, it combines history with geography. 

At a great distance from matter, the special theory will 
still be true, and therefore space will be Euclidean, since, if 
we put dt=o, the special theory gives the Euclidean formula 
for distance. The neighbourhood of gravitating nmtter is 
shown by a non-Euclidean character of the region concerned. 
This, however, requires some preliminary explanations, more 
especially an explanation of the method of tensors, which will 
form the subject of the next chapter. 

Everything in the general theory of relativity is dependent 
upon the existence of the above formula for ds*. The formula 
itself is of the nature of an empirical generalization ; no a priori 
justification for it is suggested. It is a generalization of the 
theorem of Pythagoras, which could formerly be proved. 
But the proof rested upon Euclid’s axioms, which there is no 
reason to regard as exactly true. More than that, there is 
difficulty in assigning a meaning to his fundamental concepts, 
such as the " straight ” line. The old geometry assumed a 
static space, which it could do because space and time were 
supposed to be separable. It is natural to think of motion as 
following a path in space which is there before and after the 
motion: a tram moves along pre-existing tram-lines. This 
view of motion, however, is no longer tenable. A moving point 
is a series of positions in space-time; a later moving point 
cannot pursue the " same " course, since its time co-ordinate 
is different, which means that, in another equally legitimate 
system of co-ordinates, its space co-ordinates also will be dif- 
ferent. We think of a tram as performing the same journey 
every day, because we think of the earth as fixed; but from 
the sun’s point of view, the tram never repeats a former 
journey. " We cannot step twice into the same rivers,” as 



62 THE GENERAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY 

Heraclitus says. It is thus obvious that, in place of Euclid’s 
static straight line, we shall have to substitute a movement 
having some special property defined in terms of space-time, 
not of space. The movement required is a " geodesic,” con- 
cerning which we shall have more to say later. 

In relativity theory, distant space-time points have only 
such relations as can be obtained by integration from the 
relations of neighbouring points. Since the distance between 
two points is always finite, what we call a relation between 
neighbouring points is not really a relation between points at 
all, but is a limit, like a velocity. Only the language of the 
calculus can express accurately what is meant. One might 
say, speaking pictorially, that the notion of “ interval ” is 
concerned with what, at each point, is tending to happen, 
although we cannot say that this wiU actually happen, because 
before any assigned point is reached something may have 
occurred to cause a diversion. This is, of course, the case with 
velocity. From the fact that, at a given instant, a body is 
moving in a given direction with a given velocity, we can 
infer nothing whatever as to where the body will be at another 
assigned instant, however near to the first. To infer the path 
of a body from its velocity, we must know its velocity through- 
out a finite time. Similarly the formula for interval char- 
acterizes each separate point of space-time. To obtain the 
interval between one point and another, however near 
together, we must specify a route, and integrate along that 
route. As we shall see, however, there are routes which may 
be called ” natural ” — ^namely, geodesics. It is only by means 
of them that the notion of interval can be profitably extended 
to the relations of points at a finite distance from each other. 



CHAPTER VII 

THE METHOD OF TENSORS 

The method of tensors contains the answer to a question 
which is rendered urgent by the arbitrary character of our co- 
ordinates. How can we know whether a formula expressed 
in terms of our co-ordinates expresses something which 
describes the physical occurrences, and not merely the 
particular co-ordinate system which we happen to be employ- 
ing ? A striking example of the mistakes that are possible 
in this respect is afforded by simultaneity. Suppose we have 
two events, whose co-ordinates, in the system we are employ- 
ing, are (x, y, z, t) and {x',y', z', t) — i.e. their time co-ordinates 
are the same. Before the special theory of relativity every- 
body would have asserted that this represented a physical 
fact about the two events — ^namely, that they are simul- 
taneous. Now we know that the fact concerned is one which 
also involves mention of the co-ordinate system — that is to 
say, it is not a relation between the two events only, but 
between them and the body of reference. But this is to speak 
the language of the special theory. In the general theory, 
our co-ordinates may have no important physical significance, 
and a pair of events which have one co-ordinate identical 
need not have any intrinsic physical property not possessed 
by other pairs of events. In practice, there must be some 
principle on which co-ordinates are assigned, and this principle 
must have some physical significance. But we might, for 
instance, measure time by the worst clock ever made, provided 
it only went wrong and did not actually stop. And we might 
use a certain worm as our unit of length, disregarding the 
“ FitzGerald contraction ” to which motion subjects him. 
In that case, if we say that there was unit distance between 

63 



64 


THE METHOD OF TENSORS 


two events which both occurred at a certain instant, we 
shall be making a complicated comparison between the events, 
a bad clock, and a certain worm — that is to say, we shall be 
making a statement which depends upon our co-ordinate 
system. We want to discover a sufficient, if not necessary, 
condition which, if fulfilled, insures that a statement in terms 
of co-ordinates has a meaning independent of co-ordinates. 
The difference is more or less analogous to that, in ordinary 
language, between linguistic statements and statements which 
(as is usually the case) are about what words mean. If I say 
" strength is a desirable quality,” my statement can be put 
into French or German without change of meaning. But if 
I say " strength is a word containing seven consonants and 
only one vowel,” my statement becomes false if translated 
into French or German. Now in physics co-ordinates are 
analogous to words, with the difference that it is much harder 
to distinguish ” linguistic ” statements from others. This 
is what the method of tensors undertakes to do. 

It does not seem possible to state the method of tensors in 
untechnical language; I am afraid that those philosophers who 
have not thought it worth while to learn the calculus cannot 
hope to imderstand it. Perhaps in time some simple way of 
explaining it may be found, but none has been found so far.* 

Suppose we have a vector quantity whose components are 
A', A*, A*, A*. (Here i, 2, 3, 4 play the part of suffixes, not 
of exponents denoting powers.) It happens in certain cases 
that, if we transform to any other co-ordinates x\, x\, x\, 
x\, which are continuous functions of the old co-ordinates 
*1. *t> *3- *4* shall have, as the components of the vector 
in the new co-ordinates. A'', A'*, A'*, A'*, where: 


* For what follows see Eddington, Mathematical Theory of Relativity, 
chap, ii., Cambridge, 1924. 



THE METHOD OF TENSORS 


65 


with similar formulae for A'*, A'*, A'*. When this happens, 
the vector in question is cabled contravariant. The simplest 
example is (ixi, dx^, dx^, dx^). Except in this one caise, the 
" contravajiiant ” property is s5nnbolized by the upper position 
of the suffix. 

Again we may have a vector, whose components are A^, A 
A3, At, which is tramsformed according to the law : 


A'i= 


-^A +^A 


'^dxi 


with similar formulae for A\, A’ 3, A' 3. Such a vector is 
called covariant. The simplest example is the vector whose 
components au-e : 

d<p dy 8<p 
dXi' ^3 dX3 dxt 


where y is some function which has a fixed value at each 
point, independently of the co-ordinate system. 

It is obvious that, if we have two contravariamt vectors 
A and B whose components are equal in one system of co- 
ordinates, then their components aire equal in any system of 
co-ordinates; aind the saune applies to two covariant vectors 
A and B. This follows at once from the above rules of trans- 
formation. Thus an equality of two contravairiamt vectors, 
or of two covariant vectors, when it occurs, is a fact inde- 
pendent of the co-ordinate S5retem. It is, in fact, a tensor 
equation of the simplest kind. 

The general definition of a “ tensor ’’ is a generailization of 
those of contravairiant and covau-iant vectors. Instead of 
a vector with only four components, we may have a quantity 
with sixteen components: 

^1S> •^*1. •dg3. ^»4» 

-^S*. ^83. ^S4. ^41. -^42. ^ 43 . ^44- 

Such a quantity may be denoted by " A^y," where it is under- 
stood that fi and v can each tadce all values from i to 4. 



66 


THE METHOD OF TENSORS 


Similarly we may have a quantity with sixty-four components, 
such a quantity may be denoted by " A^„," 
where /t and v and a can each take all values from i to 4. 
Such quantities are called “ tensors ” if they obey laws of 
transformation analogous to those of contravariant and 
covariant vectors. Thus a contravariant tensor with sixteen 
components, which is written “ is one which satisfies 
the rule: 




with similar equations for the other components — e.g.: 
^ - hx. fix. ^ ^ a*i 0*- • 


These equations are comprised in : 


A 


v=i: 

a.fi 


dx'^ < JA, y 

, Sx. 


where a, p are to take all values from i to 4. Similarly a 
covariant tensor with sixteen components, written " A>^" 
is one which is transformed according to the rule : 


A o V a » ^ 


and a mixed tensor, written A^, is one which satisfies the 


, dx, dx'y 


At 


There is no difficulty in extending these definitions to any 
number of suffixes. It is obvious, as in the case of contra- 
variant and covariant vectors, that if two tensors of the same 
kind are equal in one system of co-ordinates they are equal in 
any system of co-ordinates, so that tensor equations express 
conditions which are independent of the choice of co-ordinates. 
For this reason it is necessary to express all the general laws 
of physics as tensor equations; if this cannot be done, the 



THE METHOD OF TENSORS 67 

law concerned must be wrong, and must require such correction 
as will enable it to be expressed as a tensor equation. The 
law of gravitation is the most noteworthy example of this; but 
perhaps the conservation of energy is scarcely less noteworthy.* 
It seems natural to suppose that it would be possible to 
develop a less indirect method of expressing physical laws 
than that afforded by the method of tensors, which is perhaps 
a consequence of the historical development of physics. 
Originally, in physics, the co-ordinates were intended to 
express physical relations between the event concerned and 
the origin. Three of the co-ordinates were lengths, which, it 
was thought, could be ascertained by measurement with a 
rigid rod. The fourth was a time, which could be measured 
by a chronometer. There were difficulties, however, which 
the progress of physics made increasingly evident. So long 
as the earth could be regarded as motionless, axes fixed 
relatively to the earth and clocks which remained on the 
surface of the earth seemed to suffice. It was possible to 
disregard the facts that no body is quite rigid and no clock 
quite accurate, because the system of physical laws suggested 
by the choice of the most rigid bodies and the most accurate 
clocks could be used to estimate the departure of these instru- 
ments from strict constancy, and the results were on the whole 
self-consistent. But in astronomical problems, including that 
of the tides, the earth could not be treated as fixed. It was 
necessary to Newtonian dynamics that the axes should not 
have any acceleration, but it resulted from the law of gravita- 
tion that any material axes must have some acceleration. 
The axes, therefore, became ideal structures in absolute space ; 
actual measurements with actual rods could only approximate 
to the results which would have followed if we could have 
used unaccelerated axes. This difficulty was not the most 
serious: the worst trouble was concerned with absolute 
* See Eddington, op. cit., p. 134. 



THE METHOD OF TENSORS 


acceleration. Then came the experimental discovery of the 
facts which led to the special theory of relativity : the variation 
of length and mass with velocity, and the constancy of the 
velocity of light in vacuo no matter what body was used to 
define the co-ordinates. This set of difficulties was solved 
by the special theory of relativity, which showed that 
equivalent results come from employing as reference-body 
any one of a set of bodies in uniform rectilinear motion. This, 
however, only achieved what Galileo and Newton thought 
they had achieved. It included electromagnetic phenomena 
within the scope of relativity as regards velocities, but it 
was clearly necessary to extend relativity to accelerations, 
and when this was done, co-ordinates ceased to have the clear 
ph3rsical meaning they had formerly possessed. It is true 
that, even in the general theory, a co-ordinate, in any system 
which can actually be used, will always have some physical 
significance, but its significance is trivial and complicated, 
not, as before, important and simple. 

It is natural to ask ; Could we not dispense with co-ordinates 
altogether, since they have become little more than conven- 
tional names systematicaUy assigned ? Perhaps this will 
become possible in time, but at present the necessary mathe- 
matics is lacking. We wish, for example, to be able to 
differentiate, and we cannot differentiate a function unless its 
arguments and values are numbers. This is not due to what 
might seem the more difficult parts of the definition of a 
differential. We can define for a non-numerical function the 
limit (if it exists) of a function for a given argument, and also 
the four limits which exist more frequently — viz. the maximum 
and minimum for approaches from above and below ; we can 
also define a " continuous ” non-numerical function. (See 
Principia Mathematica, *230-*234.) What, so far, has not 

been defined, except for numbers, is a fraction. Now is 



THE METHOD OF TENSORS 69 

the limit of a fraction; thus, although we can generalize the 
notion of a limit, we carmot at present generalize because 
we cannot generalize the notion of a fraction. It seems clear 
a priori that, since differentiation of co-ordinates is physically 
useful even when the quantitative value of the co-ordinates 
is conventional, there must be some process, of which differ- 
entiation is a special numerical form, which can be applied 
wherever we have continuous functions, even when they are 
non-numerical. To define such a process is a problem in 
mathematical logic, probably soluble, but hitherto unsolved. 
If it were solved, it might become possible to avoid the 
elaborate and round-about process of assigning co-ordinates 
and then treating almost all their properties as irrelevant, which 
is what is done when the method of tensors is employed. 

There are, it is true, certain numbers which are important 
in the new geometry: they are those giving the measure of 
intervals. But, as we have already seen, two points at a 
finite distance apart do not have an unambiguous interval; 
and any two points are at a finite distance apart. The 
numbers involved in the notion of interval are not finite 
distances, but numbers derivable from the sixteen, coefficients 
involved in the formula for ds* in the previous chapter. 
These coefficients themselves depend upon the co-ordinate 
system, but ds* does not. We cannot develop this theme 
until we have considered geodesics; it is from them that we 
must derive the numbers which have, in the new geometry, 
the same sort of physical importance as co-ordinates were 
supposed to have in the old. These numbers will be the 
integrals of ds taken along certain geodesics. But, unlike 
lengths in the old metrical geometry, they are geometrically 
insufficient. To avoid irrelevant complications, we may 
illustrate this insufficiency by considering the special theory. 

The most obvious example of the failure of interval to 



70 THE METHOD OF TENSORS 

constitute a geometry is derived from consideration of light- 
rays. The interval between two events which are parts of the 
same light-ray is zero. Suppose now that a light-ray starts 
from an event A, and arrives at an event B; at the moment 
when it reaches B, another light-ray starts from B and 
reaches C. Then the interval between A and B is zero, that 
between B and C is zero, but that between A and C may have 
any time-like magnitude. Euclid proved that two sides of 
a triangle are together greater than the third side, and was 
criticized on the ground that this proposition was evident 
even to asses. But in relativity geometry this proposition is 
false. In our triangle ABC, AB and BC are zero, while AC 
may have any finite magnitude. 

Again, the events which are parts of a single light-ray have 
a definite time-order, in spite of the fact that the interval 
between any two of them is zero. This appears as follows. 
Suppose a light-ray proceeds from the sun to the moon and is 
thence reflected to the earth: it reaches the earth later than a 
direct ray which left the sun at the same time. There is there- 
fore a definite sense in saying that the ray reached the moon 
later than it left the sun — i.e. we can say that the ray went 
from the sun to the moon, not from the moon to the sun. 
Generalizing, we may say: If A and B are part of one light- 
ray, and light-rays from A and B, distinct from the previous 
light-ray, contain events C, C' whose interval is time-like, 
then the time-order of C, C is the same whatever these new 
light-rays may be — i.e. we shall have always C before C', 
or always C' before C. In the first case, we say that the 
“ sense ” of the ray is from A to B ; in the second, from B to A . 
This illustrates the difficulties which would arise if we were to 
attempt to found our geometry on interval alone. We must 
also take account of the purely ordinal properties of the space- 
time manifold. These properties give a wide separation 
between the departure of a light-ray from the sun and its 



THE METHOD OF TENSORS 


71 


arrival on the earth, although the " interval ” between these 
two events is zero. 

Reverting now to the method of tensors and its possible 
eventual simplification, it seems probable that we have an 
example of a general tendency to over-emphasize numbers, 
which has existed in mathematics ever since the time of 
Pythagoras, though it was temporarily less prominent in later 
Greek geometry as exemplified in Euclid. Euclid's theory of 
proportion does not, of course, dispense with numbers, since 
it uses "equimultiples"; but at any rate it requires only 
integers, not irrationals. Owing to the fact that arithmetic 
is easy, Greek methods in geometry have been in the back- 
ground since Descartes, and co-ordinates have come to seem 
indispensable. But mathematical logic has shown that 
number is logically irrelevant in many problems where it 
formerly seemed essential, notably mathematical induction, 
limits, and continuity. A new technique, which seems 
difficult because it is unfamiliar, is required when numbers 
are not used; but there is a compensating gain in logical 
purity. It should be possible to apply a similar process of 
purification to physics. The method of tensors first assigns 
co-ordinates, and then shows how to obtain results which, 
though expressed in terms of co-ordinates, do not really 
depend upon them. There must be a less indirect technique 
possible, in which we use no more apparatus than is logically 
necessary, and have a language which will only express such 
facts as are now expressed in the language of tensors, not such 
as depend upon the choice of co-ordinates. I do not say that 
such a method, if discovered, would be preferable in practice, 
but I do say that it would give a better expression of the 
essential relations, and greatly facilitate the task of the 
philosopher. In the meantime, the method of tensors is 
technically delightful, and suffices for mathematical needs. 



CHAPTER VIII 
GEODESICS 

The importance of geodesics arises through the law that, 
in the general theory of relativity, a particle not subject to 
constraints moves in a geodesic. But let us first consider 
what a geodesic is. 

An adventurous pedestrian in the Alps may wish to go 
from a place in one valley to a place in another by the shortest 
route — i.e. the shortest compatible with remaining all the 
time on the earth’s surface. He cannot determine the 
shortest route by looking at a large-scale map and drawing 
a straight line between the two places, for if this line involves 
a greater average gradient than another it may be longer, 
in distance as well as in time, than another route which slopes 
gradually to the head of a pass and then down again. What 
the traveller is seeking is a " geodesic " — i.e. the shortest line 
that can be drawn on the earth’s surface between the two 
points. In the absence of hills — e.g. on the sea — the shortest 
route is by a great circle. On complicated surfaces, geodesics 
may become very complicated cmwes. The definition is 
not exactly " the shortest route between two points.” The 
definition is that the distance along a geodesic from any one 
of its points to any other must be " stationary ” — i.e. such 
that either aU very slightly different paths are longer, or all 
very slightly different paths are shorter. This means that, 
for small variations of path, the first-order change of length 
is zero. In effect, in the ordinary geometry of surfaces the 
geodesic distance is a minimum, and in relativity theory it 
is a maximum. This is not so great a difference as it may 
seem to the non-mathematical reader, since the geodesic 



GEODESICS 


73 


distance concerned in relativity theory is more analogous to 
what would ordinarily count as lapse of time than to what 
would ordinarily cotmt as distance in space. 

Let us try to make the matter a little more concrete. The 
earth, in its annual revolution, travels from place to place in 
space-time ; between the positions of Greenwich Observatory 
on two occasions six months apart, there is a certain interval. 
From the point of view of an observer in the sun, the interval 
would formerly have been divided into two parts — namely, 
six months and about 186,000,000 miles. But from the point 
of view of the observer at Greenwich there is only one interval 
— namely, time — since the place concerned is the same on both 
occasions. Given a clock which travels without constraint 
from one point of space-time to another, the interval between 
these two points is what that clock registers as the time 
between them. I say that if a clock were constrained to travel 
by some other slightly different route, so as to be present at 
Greenwich Observatory on two occasions six months apart, 
but absent from the earth in the meantime, the time which 
that clock would register as having been taken by its journey 
would be less than six months. The interval between distant 
points is not, like distance in geometry, something which 
can be defined independently of the route chosen. The interval 
must be obtained by integration along a specified route, and 
a geodesic route is one which makes the interval greater than 
it is by any slightly different route. The time between two 
given events at which a man is present seems less if he has 
spent the intervening time in rapid travel than if he has let 
himself drift passively ; this is a sort of law of cosmic boredom. 
All bodies, left to themselves, choose the course which is at 
each moment the most boring, in the sense that it makes the 
time between two given events seem longest. However, it is 
time to have done with these irrelevancies, and return to 


seriousness. 



74 


GEODESICS 


Since the small interval ds is independent of the co- 
ordinates, a geodesic also is independent of them. We can 
easily obtain the differential equations which a geodesic must 
satisfy, and these equations must be satisfied by the same lines 
whatever s}^tem of co-ordinates we are employing. From 
a given point, goedesics start in all directions. Some of these 
are the paths of freely moving particles ; others are not. The 
law that the path of a particle is a geodesic does not tell us 
quite as much as it seems to do, since it is only by observation 
of the motions of bodies that we discover what paths are 
geodesics. Assuming that the orbit of the earth is a geodesic, 
we can draw inferences as to the nature of the formula for ds* 
in the sun’s gravitational field. For we have no a priori 
knowledge about the coefficients which appear in the 
formula for is*; their values are to be deduced from observa- 
tion. What we can say is that it is possible, compatibly with 
observed facts, so to determine the g^y that the path of a 
body in a gravitational field shall be a geodesic. In fact, 
we get in this way a more accurate representation of the facts 
than we got from the Newtonian law, but the observable 
differences between the two are few and minute. 

Although the new law of gravitation and the old do not 
lead to very different results — as, indeed, they could not, since 
the old law accorded closely with observed facts — yet the 
difference in the ideas involved is very great. A planet, in 
the new theory, is moving freely, whereas in the old theory 
it was subject to a central force directed towards the sun. 
In the old theory, the planet moved in an ellipse; in the new 
theory, it moves in the nearest possible approach to a straight 
line — to wit, a geodesic. In the old theory, the sun was like 
a despotic government, emitting decrees from the metropolis; 
in the new, the solar system is like the society of Kropotkin’s 
dreams, in which everybody does what he prefers at each 
moment, and the result is perfect order. The odd thing is 



GEODESICS 


75 


that, as far as observation goes, the difference between these 
two theories is exceedingly minute. To the plain man, it 
would seem impossible to reconcile the statement that the 
earth moves in an ellipse with the statement that it moves 
in a sort of straight line, however queer the sort may be. And 
yet almost the whole of the difference between these two state- 
ments is a matter of convention. It is possible to adhere 
to Euclidean space even now; this requires a different way of 
stating Einstein’s law of gravitation, but does not demand 
the rejection of anything that has been proved true. Dr 
Whitehead considers this plan preferable to Einstein’s. What 
may be called the new orthodoxy, per contra, is set forth by 
Professor Eddington. It will be worth while to consider the 
point at issue between them. 

Professor Eddington says (op. cit., p. 37) : 

“ Suppose that an observer has chosen a definite system of 
space co-ordinates and of time-reckoning (x^, x^, x^, x^}, and 
that the geometry of these is given by: 

ds*=gyidx^* + + • • • + zgi^x^dXi (i6- 1). 

Let him be under the mistaken impression that the geometry 

ds^*= - dXi* - dx^* - dx^* + dx^ ( i 6 ’ 2 ) 

— that being the geometry with which he is most familiar 
in pure mathematics. We use ds^ to distinguish his mistaken 
value of the interval. Since intervals can be compared by 
experimental methods, he ought soon to discover that his 
ds^ cannot be reconciled with observational results, and so 
realize his mistake. But the mind does not so readily get 
rid of an obsession. It is more likely that our observer will 
continue in his opinion, and attribute the discrepancy of the 
observations to some influence which is present and affects the 
behaviour of his test-bodies. He will, so to speak, introduce 
a supernatural agency which he can blame for the consequences 
of his mistake. Let us examine what name he would apply 
to this agency. 



76 


GEODESICS 


“ Of the four test-bodies considered the moving particle is 
in general the most sensitive to small changes of geometry, 
and it would be by this test that the observer would first 
discover discrepancies. The path laid down for it by our 
observer is: <• 

I iSo is stationary 

— i.e. a straight line in the co-ordinates (%, x^, x^, x^). The 
particle, of course, pays no heed to this, and moves in the 
different track: 

I ds is stationary. 

Although apparently undisturbed it deviates from ‘ uniform 
motion in a straight line.’ The name given to any agency 
which causes deviation from uniform motion in a straight line 
is force according to the Newtonian definition of force. Hence 
the agency invoked through our observer’s mistake is described 
as a ' field of force.’ 

“ The field of force is not always introduced by inadvertence, 
as in the foregoing illustration. It is sometimes introduced 
deliberately by the mathematician — e.g. when he introduces 
the centrifugal force. There would be little advantage and 
many disadvantages in banishing the phrase ‘ field of force ’ 
from our vocabulary. We shall therefore regularize the pro- 
cedure which our observer has adopted. We call (i6*2) the 
abstract geometry of the system of co-ordinates {x^, x^, x^, x ^ ; 
it may be chosen arbitrarily by the observer. The natural 
geometry is {i6-i). 

“ A field of force represents the discrepancy between the natural 
geometry of a co-ordinate system and the abstract geometry 
arbitrarily ascribed to it. 

" A field of force thus arises from an attitude of mind. 
If we do not take our co-ordinate system to be something 
different from that which it really is, there is no field of force.” 

It is not quite clear why the man who uses forces with a 
conventional geometry should be regarded as making a " mis- 
take,” while the man who says that free particles travel in 
geodesics, and to justify himself has a queer geometry, is 
thought to be saying something substantially more accurate. 



GEODESICS 


77 


It is true that we must not conceive “ force ” as an actual 
agency, as the older mechanics did; it is merely part of the 
method of describing how bodies move. But as soon as this 
is recognized, it is a mere question of convenience whether we 
speak of forces or not. Let it be conceded that the method 
of the general theory of relativity is better from a logico- 
aesthetic point of view; I do not see, however, why we should 
regard it as any more " true.’’ I am not considering, at the 
moment, the fact that Einstein’s law of gravitation gives a 
slightly more accurate picture of the phenomena than 
Newton’s, since this is not really relevant to the particular 
point at issue. 

Let us now consider Dr Whitehead's view, which is, on this 
point, the opposite of Professor Eddington’s. In the Preface 
to The Principle of Relativity* he says: 

" As the result of a consideration of the character of our 
knowledge in general, and of our knowledge of nature in 
particular, ... I deduce that our experience requires and 
exhibits a basis of uniformity, and that in the case of nature 
this basis exhibits itself as the rmiformity of spatio-temporal 
relations. This conclusion entirely cuts away the casual 
heterogeneity of these relations which is the essential of 
Einstein’s later theory. It is this uniformity which is essential 
to my outlook, and not the Euclidean geometry which I adopt 
as lending itself to the simplest exposition of the facts of 
natiue. I should be very willing to believe that each permanent 
space is either uniformly elliptic or uniformly hyperbolic, if 
any observations are more simply explained by such a h)q)0- 
thesis. It is inherent in my theory to maintain the old 
division between physics and geometry. Physics is the science 
of the contingent relations of nature, and geometry expresses 
its uniform relatedness.” 

Again, in discussing the structure of space-time, he says 
{ib., p. 29) : 

• Cambridge, 19*2. p. v. 



GEODESICS 


" The structure is uniform because of the necessity for 
knowledge that there be a system of imiform relatedness, in 
terms of which the contingent relations of natural factors can 
be expressed. Otherwise we can know nothing until we know 
everything.’’ 

And on p. 64; 

" Though the character of time and space is not in any sense 
a priori, the essential relatedness of any perceived field of 
events to all other events requires that this relatedness of all 
events should conform to the ascertained disclosure derived 
from the limited field. For we can only know that distant 
events are spatio-temporally connected with the events 
immediately perceived by knowing what these relations are. 
In other words, these relations must possess a systematic 
uniformity in order that we may know of nature as extending 
beyond isolated cases subjected to the direct examination of 
individual perception. . . . This doctrine leads to the re- 
jection of Einstein’s interpretation of his formulae, as expressing 
a casual heterogeneity of spatio-temporal warping, dependent 
upon contingent adjectives.” 

Thus whereas Eddington seems to regard it as necessary 
to adopt Einstein’s variable space, Whitehead regards it as 
necessary to reject it. For my part, I do not see why we should 
agree with either view: the matter seems to be one of con- 
venience in the interpretation of formulae. Nevertheless, 
Dr Whitehead’s airguments deserve caireful examination. 

The main force of the above passages is epistemological: 
the question involved is the Kamtian one. How is knowledge 
possible ? I do not wish to dead with this question in its 
general form. But without going into theory of knowledge, 
there is what may be cailled a common-sense amswer. Einstein 
enables us to predict what in fact cam be predicted about 
astronomical occurrences, amd that seems all that ought to be 
demanded of him. Dr Whitehead objects to the “ casual ” 
heterogeneity of space-time in Einstein’s system. In a sense, 
this adjective is justified, since the character of space-time 



GEODESICS 


79 


in any region depends upon circumstances which can only be 
ascertained empirically — ^namely, the distribution of matter 
in the neighbourhood. But in another sense the adjective is 
not justified, since Einstein’s law of gravitation gives the rule 
according to which space-time is affected by the neighbourhood 
of matter. To say that we cannot, by the help of this rule, 
know in advance the geometry of a region we have not explored, 
seems an insufficient objection, since we also cannot know 
what astronomical occurrences will take place unless we know 
the distribution of matter. Einstein, like other people, assumes 
the permanence of matter; this is a point to be considered in 
another connection, but it has no particular relevance to the 
present issue. The way the heavenly bodies move depends 
upon the distribution of matter in their neighbourhood, which 
is, in Dr Whitehead’s phrase, " casual.” Even by assuming 
Euclidean geometry we cannot make astronomical predictions 
unless we assume that we know the important facts about the 
distribution of matter in the region concerned. Whether we 
put the consequences of these facts into our geometry or not 
does not seem to make any real difference to the possibility of 
physical knowledge. In all theoretical physics, there is a 
certain admixture of facts and calculations; so long as the 
combination is such as to give results which observation 
confirms, I cannot see that we can have any a priori objection. 
Dr Whitehead’s view seems to rest upon the assumption that 
the principles of scientific inference ought to be in some 
sense " reasonable.” Perhaps we all make this assumption 
in one form or another. But for my part I should prefer 
to infer " reasonableness ” from success, rather than set 
up in advance a standard of what can be regarded as 
credible. 

I do not therefore see any ground for rejecting a variable 
geometry such as Einstein's. But equally I see no groimd for 
supposing that the facts necessitate it. The question is, to 



GEODESICS 


my mind, merely one of logical simplicity and comprehensive- 
ness. From this point of view, I prefer the variable space in 
which bodies move in geodesics to a Euclidean space with a 
field of force. But I cannot regard the question as one 
concerning the facts. 

The conclusion would seem to be, therefore, that, when 
physics is considered, as we are now considering it, as a 
deductive system, we do well to adopt the Einsteinian inter- 
pretation: free particles move in geodesics, and the law of 
gravitation is a law as to how geodesics are shaped in the 
neighbourhood of matter. This view is essentially simple, 
though it leads to complicated mathematics. It accords with 
the facts, and it puts the law of gravitation in a recognizable 
place among physical principles, instead of leaving it, as 
heretofore, an isolated and imrelated law. I propose, there- 
fore, to continue to adopt Einstein’s view as to the best way 
of interpreting the principles of physics, without suggesting 
that no other way is logically possible. 

There is one matter of great theoretical importance, which 
is not very clear in the usual accounts of relativity. How do 
we know whether two events are to be regarded as happening 
to the same piece of matter ? An electron or a proton is 
supposed to preserve its identity throughout time; but our 
fundamental continuum is a continuum of events. One must 
therefore suppose that one unit of matter is a series of events, 
or a series of sets of events. It is not clear what is the 
theoretical criterion for determining whether two events both 
belong to one such series. We may assume, I suppose, that 
two events which overlap — i.e. which are both present at 
some point of space-time — must belong to one unit of matter. 
(It is not to be assumed that an event which belongs to one 
unit of matter belongs to no other.) We may also assume 
that two events which have a space-like interval, or have a zero 
interval without overlapping, do not belong to one unit of 



GEODESICS 


8i 

matter. But when two events have a time-like interval, 
there is no obvious criterion. Any two such events can be 
connected by a geodesic in which any two points have a time- 
like separation; therefore, so far as the laws of dynamics are 
concerned, they might both belong to the same material unit. 
Yet sometimes we think they do, and sometimes we think 
they do not. It is evidently part of the business of physics to 
tell us how we ^lre to decide this question in a given case. 
What can we say about it ?* 

The decision must depend upon intermediate history — i.e. 
upon the existence of some series of intermediate events (or 
sets of events) following each other according to some law. 
If there exists any law which is in fact obeyed by strings of 
events, such a law can be used to define what we mean by one 
material unit. We know that there are such laws, but their 
importance in this connection is not emphasized, because it 
has hardly been realized that there is a problem owing to the 
substitution of events for bits of matter as the fundamental 
stuff of physics. For common sense, there is a more or less 
vague law of what may be called qualitative continuity. If 
you look persistently in a given direction, what you see, as a 
rule, alters gradually; there are exceptions, such as explosions, 
but they are rare. (I am not talking of a theoretical gradual- 
ness, but of one that is obvious to imtrained perception.) If 
you see, say, a well-defined red patch, whose shape and tint 
do not alter greatly while you are looking, you conclude that 
there is a material object there, especially if you can touch it 
whenever you choose. Common sense achieves in this way 
a considerable measure of constancy in its objects. More is 
achieved by reducing matter to molecules, more stiU by re- 
ducing it to atoms, and yet more by reducing it to protons 
and electrons. But physicists would not feel pleased with 

• This subject is considered again in Chap. XIV. from a somewhat 
different standpoint. 

6 



82 


GEODESICS 


electrons and protons but for the fact that their tables and 
chairs, their laboratories and their books, consist, on the whole, 
of the same electrons and protons on different occaisions. 
Qualitative continuity remains the basis of the whole pro- 
ceeding. Suppose, one evening, you were to say to an 
astronomer: How do you know that that white patch in the 
sky is the moon ? He would stare at you, and think you mad. 
He would not reply: because the course and phases of the 
moon have been worked out by astronomical theory, and that 
is where the moon ought to be, and the shape it ought to have, 
at the present moment in this latitude and longitude. What 
he would say is : Why, can’t you see it’s the moon ? To which 
the right answer would be: Yes, / can, but I didn’t suppose 
you could, because you ought to have got beyond such a crude 
criterion. 

Moreover, there are identities in physics which are not 
material. A wave has a certain identity; if this were not 
the case, our visual perceptions would not have the intimate 
connection they in fact do have with physical objects. Suppose 
we see several lamps simultaneously: we are able to dis- 
tinguish them because each sends out its own light-waves, 
which preserve their individuality until they reach the eye. 
Our chief reason for not regarding a wave as a physical object 
seems to be that it is not indestructible. But this is not our 
only reason, since, if it were, we might regard the energy of 
a wave as a physical object. We do not regard energy as a 
" thing,” because it is not connected with the qualitative con- 
tinuity of common-sense objects: it may appear as light or 
heat or soimd or what not. But now that energy and mass 
have turned out to be identical, our refusal to regard energy 
as a " thing” should incline us to the view that what possesses 
mass need not be a " thing.” We seem driven, therefore, to 
the view advocated by Eddington, that there are certain 
invariants, and that (with some degree of inaccuracy) our 



GEODESICS 


83 


senses and our common sense have singled them out as 
deserving names. The correct theoretical definition of a 
single piece of matter will thus depend upon the mathematical 
invariants resulting from our formula for interval. This topic, 
however, demands a new chapter. 



CHAPTER IX 

INVARIANTS AND THEIR PHYSICAL INTERPRETATION 


There is a point of view specially associated with Professor 
Eddington, which it is necessary to consider at this stage, 
since it arises naturally in the attempt to develop physics as 
a self-contained deductive system. According to this view, 
practically all theoretical physics is a vast tautology or con- 
vention, the only part excepted, so far, being the part which 
involves quantum-theory. This is not the whole of Professor 
Eddington’s view on the subject, as he has shown when not 
writing simply as a technical physicist;* but it is what we 
may call his " professional ” view.t 
Let us begin with the conservation of momentum and of 
energy (or mass). Here we start from a proposition of pure 
mathematics. To explain this proposition wiU require certain 
preliminaries. It will be remembered that we had: 


We put: 


ds*=£g^x^dx,. 

S == I Su Si2 Si 3 Su 
S21 Sn ijs Su 
Sn Sit Ssi Su 
S*i Sii S*a Su 


And we write 
divided by g. 


g*‘’' for the minor of in this determinant. 
Also: 


a 


which=o if and=i if ^=»'. 

The next step is the definition of the " three-index symbols,” 


• See his essay in Science, Religion, and Reality, edited by Needham, 
925- 

t Cf. Mathematical Theory of Relativity, §§ 52, 54, 60. 

84 



INVARIANTS AND THEIR INTERPRETATION 85 


We can now define the tensor which Einstein uses for his law 
of gravitation. It is G^„, where: 

G^={lJio.a] {w>,a]~[iiv.a] (“»-«} + 

summed for all values of a and a from i to 4. Einstein 
takes as the law of gravitation G^=o in empty space. For 
the moment, we are not concerned with the law of gravitation, 
but with certain identities. We put : 

(/*,.-= I, 2.3,4). 

Further, there is a rule for raising or lowering suf&xes in 
any tensor, of which an illustration is: 

(..= 1 , 2 , 3 . 4 ). 

so that — 

+ g'»G^ + 

Generalizing the notion of the “ divergence ” of a vector, we 
obtain a general definition of the divergence of any tensor. 
Taking a tensor of the form A”^ for purposes of illustration, its 
" divergence ” has four components: 

{aX + {aI),+(aX+(aX (/*=!. 2 . 3 . 4 ). 

where: 

{4)i=p- + -^{01.1} A^-£ Al 

axi a a 

and similarly for (^4 *)2, etc. These definitions have been given 
in order to enunciate the proposition:* 

The divergence of G^ - igJ[G is identically zero, 
which Eddington calls " the fundamental theorem of 
mechanics.” 


Eddington, op. cit., p. 115. 



86 INVARIANTS AND THEIR INTERPRETATION 


In order to see the use made of this proposition, we need to 
introduce the “ material energy-tensor,” defined as: 


dx^ dXy 
^*ds 8 s’ 


where e, is the " proper density ” of the matter concerned — 
i.e. its density relative to axes moving with the matter. From 
this, by the usual rule for lowering a suffix, we obtain a tensor 
2 ^. The principles of the conservation of mass and momentum 
are contained in the statement that the divergence of T^, 
vanishes. This suggests the identification of JJl with 
GJl - igJlG, whose divergence vanishes identically — apart 
from a numerical factor, which, for convenience, is taken as 
- 8». Thus Eddington puts: 

G;-ig;G=-8»r; (54-3). 

which is the law of gravitation for continuous matter. 

It has been necessary to make the above excursion into 
mathematical regions in order to be able to understand the 
observations which succeed to the above in Eddington’s 
exposition {op. cit., p. 119). He says: 

“ Appeal is now made to a Principle of Identification. 
Our deductive theory starts with the interval . . ..from which 
the tensor is immediately obtained. By pure mathematics 
we derive other tensors. . . . These constitute our world- 
building material; and the aim of the deductive theory is to 
construct from this a world which functions in the same way 
as the known physical world. If we succeed, mass, momentum , 
stress, etc., must be the vulgar names for certain analytical 
quantities in the deductive theory; and it is this stage of 
naming the analytical tensors which is reached in {54‘3). If 
the theory provides a tensor GJI - i^gJlG, which behaves in 
exactly the same way as the tensor summarizing the mass, 
momentum and stress of matter is observed to behave, it is 
difficult to see how anything more could be required 
of it.” 



INVARIANTS AND THEIR INTERPRETATION 87 

There are a niimber of other examples of the same method 
in Eddington’s work, but we may take the above as typical, 
since it is the simplest mathematically. It is worth while to 
consider the nature of the method, apart from its technical 
embodiment. This is the more necessary, as it is not easy to 
be clear as to the logical and empirical elements in theoretical 
physics as developed by the above method. 

Fundamentally, the method is the same as that which has 
always been pursued when mathematics has been applied to 
the physical world. The aim has been to obtain mathematical 
laws which gave correct results wherever they could be tested 
by observation. The fewer and more general and more com- 
prehensive the laws, the more scientific taste was gratified. 
Newton’s law of gravitation was better than Kepler’s laws, 
both because it was one law instead of three, and because it 
gave a larger number of correct deductions. But at every 
stage the subject-matter of physics grows more abstract, and 
its connection with what we observe grows more remote. 
Eddington’s ideal is to start with only one fundamental law 
— namely, the formula for is* — ^which, as generalized by Weyl, 
will give electromagnetic equations as well as gravitation. 
From this one fundamental law, by pure mathematics, we 
deduce the existence of quantities behaving in certain ways. 
Elementary theorizing from observation has led us to believe 
that there are quantities connected with what we observe 
which behave in these ways. We therefore identify the ob- 
served quantities with the deduced quantities. This is, in 
essence, the same sort of thing as we do when we associate 
what we see with light-waves. We may thus regard physics 
from the two points of view, the inductive and the deductive. 
In the latter, we start from the formula for interval (together 
with certain other assumptions), and we deduce by mathema- 
tics a world having certain mathematical characteristics. In 
the inductive view, the same mathematical characteristics 



88 INVARIANTS AND THEIR INTERPRETATION 


are arrived at, but they are now those which may be supposed 
to belong to the physical world in its entirety if we supplement 
observation by means of the postulate that everything happens 
in accordance with simple general laws. 

We may thus say that the world of elementary physics is 
semi-abstract, while that of deductive relativity-theory is 
wholly abstract. The appearance of deducing actual pheno- 
mena from mathematics is delusive; what really happens is 
that the phenomena afford inductive verification of the general 
principles from which our mathematics starts. Every ob- 
served fact retains its full evidential value; but now it con- 
firms not merely some particular law, but the general law 
from which the deductive system starts. There is, however, 
no logical necessity for one fact to follow given another, or 
a number of others, because there is no logical necessity about 
our fundamental principles. 

The question of interpretation, it must be admitted, is 
somewhat difi&cult when physics is conceived in this very 
abstract maimer. What, for example, is ds ? We start from 
a view which is, to a certain extent, intelligible in -terms of 
observation. In the case of a time-hke interval, it is the time 
which elapses between the two events according to a clock, 
not subject to constraints, which is present at both events. 
On the earth’s surface, the time measured by a clock can be 
inferred, with suitable precautions, from the visual perceptions 
of a careful observer. In the case of a space-like interval, 
ds is the distance between two events as estimated by meeisure- 
ments carried out on a body which is present at both, and for 
which the two events are simultaneous. The elementary 
operation of measiuring lengths is here supposed possible. 
But when we pass from this initial view to the abstract view 
which is required by the general theory of relativity, the 
interval can only be actually estimated by using rather 
elaborate physics to make deductions from what can be 



INVARIANTS AND THEIR INTERPRETATION 89 

actually observed by means of clocks and footrules. For 
logical theory, the interval is primitive, but from the point of 
view of empirical verification it is a complicated function of 
empirical data, deduced by means of physics in its semi- 
abstract form. The unity and simplicity of the deductive edifice , 
therefore, must not blind us to the complexity of empirical 
physics, or to the logical independence of its various portions. 

In particular, when the conservation of mass or of momentum 
appears as an identity, that is only true in the deductive 
system ; in their empirical meaning, these laws are by no means 
logical necessities. There might easily be a world in which 
they were false, and it might be capable of a treatment as 
vmified and mathematical as the general theory of relativity ; 
but, if so, the fundamental laws would be different. 

What is novel and interesting in the point of view we have 
been considering is the character of the relation between 
empirical and deductive physics. But there is no real diminu- 
tion of the need for empirical observation. I do not for a 
moment suggest that anything in the above is a criticism of 
Professor Eddington; indeed, I imagine he would regard it as 
a string of truisms. I have been concerned only to guard 
against a possible misxmderstanding on the part of those 
who do not feel for mathematics the contempt which is bred 
of familiarity. 

In the foregoing remarks, however, we have neglected one 
important aspect of Eddington's theory. In addition to 
the fact that the whole general theory of relativity can be 
deduced from a few simple assumptions, interest attaches to 
the manner of the deduction and the considerations by which 
the substantial import of mathematical formulae is made less, 
or at least other, tham would naturally be supposed. A good 
example is afforded by a paxaigraph headed " Interpretation of 
Einstein’s Law of Gravitation,”* The law concerned is not 
• Op. dt., S 66, pp. 152-155. 



90 INVARIANTS AND THEIR INTERPRETATION 


G^=o, which is not supposed to be quite accurate where 
stellar distances are concerned; it is the modified law: 

where A must be very small, so small that within the solar 
system the new law gives the same results, within the limits of 
observation, as = o. The new law is shown to be equivalent 
to the assumption that, in empty space, the radius of curvature 
in every direction is ever3Aivhere \/ But this is interpreted 
as a law about our measuring rods — ^namely, that they adjust 
themselves to the radius of curvature at any place and in any 
direction. It is interpreted as meaning : 

“ The length of a specified material structure bears a 
constant ratio to the radius of curvature of the world at the 
place and in the direction in which it lies.” And the following 
gloss is added: 

" The law no longer appears to have any reference to the 
constitution of an empty continuum. It is a law of material 
structure showing what dimensions a specified collection of 
molecules must take up in order to adjust itself to equilibrium 
with the surrounding conditions of the world.” 

In particular, electrons must make these adjustments, and 
it is suggested elsewhere that the symmetry of an electron 
and its equality with other electrons are not substantial facts, 
but consequences of the method of measurement (pp. 153-4). 
One cannot complain of an author for not doing everything, 
but at this point most readers wiU feel a desire for some dis- 
cussion of the theory of measiureraent. The elementary 
meaning of measurement of lengths is derived from super- 
position of a supposedly rigid body. A rigid body, as Dr 
Whitehead has pointed out, is primarily one which seems 
rigid, such as a steel bar in contradistinction to a piece of 
putty. When I say that a body “ seems ” rigid, I mean that 
it looks and feels as if it were not altering its shape and size. 



INVARIANTS AND THEIR INTERPRETATION 91 


This, so far as it can be relied upon, implies some constant 
relation to the human body: if the eye and the hand grew at 
the same rate as the “ rigid ” body, it would look and feel 
as if it were unchanging. But if other objects in our im- 
mediate environment did not grow meanwhile, we should 
infer that we and our measure had grown. There would, 
however, be no meaning in the supposition that all bodies are 
bigger in certain places than they are in certain others ; at least, 
if we suppose the alteration to be in a fixed ratio. If we do 
not add this proviso, there is a good meaning in the supposi- 
tion; in fact, we do actually believe that all bodies are bigger 
at the equator than at the North Pole, except such as are too 
small to be visible or palpable. When we say that the length 
of an object at the equator is one metre, we do not mean that 
its length is that which the standard metre would have if 
moved from Paris to the equator. But the expansion of bodies 
with temperature would have been difficult to discover if it 
had not been possible to bring bodies of different temperatures 
into the same neighbourhood and measure them before their 
temperatures had become equal; it would also have been 
difficult if all bodies had expanded equally when their tempera- 
tures rose. These elementary considerations, along with 
many others, make rigidity an ideal, which actual bodies 
approach without attaining. Mere superposition thus ceases 
to give a measure of length: it gives still a comparison of the 
two bodies concerned, but not of either with the standard xmit 
of length. To obtain the latter, we have to adjust the im- 
mediate results of the operation of measuring, by meams of a 
mass of physical theory. If the measures which we obtain are 
mutually consistent, that is all we can ask; but it is possible 
that a change in physical theory might have given other 
measures which would also have been mutually consistent. 

Professor Eddington, in the passage which we quoted 
partially in introducing this discussion, is careful to say that 



92 INVARIANTS AND THEIR INTERPRETATION 


he is concerned with measurement by direct comparison. 
He says: 

“ The statement that the radius of curvature is a constant 
length requires more consideration before its full significance 
is appreciated. Length is not absolute, and the result can 
only mean constant relative to the material standards of length 
used in all our measurements and in particular in those 
measurements which verify G^=Xg^. In order to make a 
direct comparison the material unit must be conveyed to 
the place and pointed in the direction of the length to be 
measured. It is true that we often use indirect methods, 
avoiding actual transfer or orientation; but the justification 
of these indirect methods is that they give the same result as 
a direct comparison, and their validity depends upon the 
truth of the fundamental laws of nature. We are here dis- 
cussing the most fundamental of these laws, and to admit 
the validity of the indirect methods of comparisons at this 
stage would land us in a vicious circle.” 

I confess that I am puzzled by this passage. Taken in its 
plain and obvious sense, it means that the standard metre 
is to be taken from Paris, and used without any corrections for 
temperature, etc., because as soon as we introduce such 
corrections we are assuming a great deal of physics, and thus 
seem to be making ourselves liable to the vicious circle which, 
we are told, is to be avoided. It is evident, however, that 
this is not what Professor Eddington means, since he goes on 
at once to speak of the electron as making the adjustments 
concerned. Now the electron may be, theoretically, a perfect 
spatial unit, but we certainly cannot compare its size with 
that of larger bodies directly, without assuming any previous 
physical knowledge. It seems that Professor Eddington is 
postulating an ideal observer, who can see electrons just as 
directly as (or, rather, much more directly than) we can see 
a metre rod. In short, his “direct measurement ” is an opera- 
tion as abstract and theoretical as his mathematical symbolism. 



INVARIANTS AND THEIR INTERPRETATION 93 


That being admitted, we may take the electron as our spatial 
unit, and ask ourselves what our ideal observer could do with 
it. He could not take a lot of electrons and place them end 
on in a row, with a view to measuring a given length, since an 
infinite force is required to make two electrons touch. To 
measure ordinary lengths, he would have to take (say) 
hydrogen at a given temperature and pressure, enclosed in a 
balloon whose radius is the length to be measured; he could 
then count the number of electrons in the balloon and take 
its cube root as a measure of the said length. But to ascertain 
the temperature and pressure, he will have to make other 
measurements; moreover, he will have to assume that his 
balloon is spherical. Altogether, the method does not seem 
very practical. 

I have no complete theory of physical measurements to 
offer, but it seemed desirable to illustrate how difficult it is 
to say precisely what measmement means in an advanced 
science such as physics. We have certain postulates, such as 
“ lengths which are equal to the same length are equal to 
one another,” but actual measurements, when made with 
sufficient accuracy, are not found to verify these postulates. 
Therefore we invent physical laws to save the postulates. 
With each fresh law it becomes more difficult to say exactly 
what we do mean when, e.g., we give the wave-length of a 
certain line in the spectrum of hydrogen in terms of the 
metre. (This is particularly odd in view of the fact that 
these wave-lengths are given to more significant figures than 
can be warranted by the operations applicable to the standard 
metre itself, whose length is only known, in comparison with 
other lengths, to a very moderate degree of approximation.) 
In physical theory, measurement should rest upon an integra- 
tion of the formula for ds*. But in physical practice the of 
that formula can only be determined by means of measure- 
ments. Thus the only thing we seem warranted in saying 



94 INVARIANTS AND THEIR INTERPRETATION 

is this: It is possible to correct the results of actual measure- 
ments according to certain known rules, in such a way that 
the corrected lengths shall satisfy such postulates as Euclid’s 
first axiom ; when this is done, we find, by means of physical 
theory, that all electrons have the same size. But this is not, 
considered empirically, at all a simple fact. And considered 
as a statement in the deductive theory it probably has a good 
meaning, but one which demands much elucidation. Until 
this is forthcoming, all use of numbers as measures of physical 
quantities in theoretical physics raises problems, since we do 
not know what, in theoretical physics, replaces the operation 
of measurement as conducted in the laboratory and in daily 
life. 

The theory of length-measurement raises problems which 
bring us naturally to Weyl’s relativistic theory of electro- 
magnetism, which we must now briefly consider. 



CHAPTER X 
WEYL-S THEORY 

The theory to be considered in this chapter is, from a geo- 
metrical point of view, a natural generalization of Einstein’s 
arbitrariness of co-ordinates; from a physical point of view, 
it fits electromagnetism into the deductive system, which 
Einstein’s theory does not do. The theory is due to Hermann 
Weyl, and will be found in his Space, Time, Matter (1922). 

The puzzles about measurement considered at the end of 
Chapter IX. naturally suggest the point of view from which 
Weyl starts. As he says: “ The same certainty that charac- 
terizes the relativity of motion accompanies the principle of 
the relativity of magnitude" (op. cit., p. 283). Measurement 
is a comparison of lengths, and Weyl suggests that, when 
lengths in different places are to be compared, the result may 
depend upon the route pursued in passing from the one place 
to the other. Lengths at the same place (i.e. having one end 
identical), if small, he regards as directly comparable; also he 
assumes continuity in the changes accompanying transporta- 
tion. This is not the sum-total of his assumptions, nor the most 
general way of stating them; but before we can state them 
adequately certain explanations are necessary. 

Reduced to its simplest terms, the conception used by Weyl 
may be expressed as follows. Given a vector at a point, what 
are we to mean by the statement that a vector at another point 
is equal to it ? There must be some element of convention in 
our definition ; let us therefore, as a first step, set up a unit 
of length in each place, and see what limitations it is desirable 
to impose on our initial arbitrariness. 

There is, to begin with, an assumption which is made almost 
95 



96 


WEYL’S THEORY 


tacitly, and that is, that we can recognize something in one 
place as the " same " vector as something at another place. 
We may perhaps take this sameness as being merely analytical ; 
the two are the same function of the co-ordinates at their 
respective places. I do not think this is all that is meant, since 
a vector is supposed to have some physical significance; but 
if more is meant, it is not clear how it is to be defined. We 
will therefore assume that, given a function of the co-ordinates 
which is a vector, we shall regard the same function of other 
values of the co-ordinates as the “ same ” vector at another 
place. 

We next have to define " parallel displacement.” This 
may be defined in various ways. Perhaps the most graphic 
description is to say that it is displacement along a geodesic 
(Eddington, op. cit., p. 71). Another definition is that it is 
a displacement such that the ” covariant derivative " vanishes, 
the covariant derivative of a vector with respect to v being 
defined as A^», where: 

a 

For the definition of (wa) , see the beginning of Chapter IX. 
In the tensor calculus, covariant differentiation takes the place 
of ordinary differentiation for many purposes, since the co- 
variant derivative of a tensor is a tensor, whereas the ordinary 
derivative is in general not a tensor. We assume that our 
units of length in different places are so chosen that, when a 
small displacement is moved to a neighbouring place by 
parallel displacement, the change in the measure of its length 
is small, and is proportional to its length. We assume, in short, 
that the ratio of the increase of length to the initial length 
for a change of co-ordinates {dx^, dx^, dx^, dx^ is: 

Kii*! + Kji*, -t- + KtdX^. 

So that (<Ci, Kj, Kj, K^) form a vector, k^. 



WEYL’S THEORY 


97 


Now it is possible to express Maxwell’s equations in terms 
of a vector which may be identified with the above vector 
Hence it is possible to regard electromagnetic phenomena as 
explained by the variation of what is taken as the unit as 
we pass from point to point. I shall not attempt to explain 
the theory, as it would in any case be necessary to read a full 
account in order to grasp its significance. 

Here, perhaps even more than elsewhere in relativity theory, 
it is difficult to disentangle the conventional elements from 
those having physical significance. On the face of it, it might 
seem as though we were attempting to account for actual 
physical phenomena by means of a mere convention as to 
choice of units. But this, of course, is not what is meant. 
The way the unit is assigned in different places is called by 
Eddington the "gauge-system”: this is only partially 
arbitrary, and is in part the representation of the physical 
state of the world. This has to do with the fact that vectors 
are not purely analytical expressions, but also correspond to 
physical facts. It would seem, however, that the theory has 
not yet been expressed with the logical purity that is to be 
desired, chiefly because it is not prefaced by any clear account 
of what is to be understood by “ measurement ” — or, what 
comes to much the same thing from the standpoint of theory, 
what we are to mean when we talk of " moving ” a vector, 
whether by parallel displacement or in any other way. To 
“ move ” something, we must be able to recognize some identity 
between things in different places. Perhaps all this is quite 
clear in the minds of competent exponents of the theory, but 
if so they have not succeeded in conveying their thoughts 
without loss of clarity to readers who have not their back- 
ground. When Eddington says: “ Take a displacement at P 
and transfer it by parallel displacement to em infinitely near 
point P' ” (p. 200), I find myself wondering how, exactly, 
the displacement is to preserve its identity throughout the 

7 



98 


WEYL'S THEORY 


transfer, and the only answer suggested by the accompanying 
formulae is that the identity is that of an algebraic expression 
in terms of the co-ordinates. This, however, is clearly 
insufficient. 

Professor Eddington, after expounding Weyl’s theory, pro- 
ceeds to generalize it. and some of his accompanying elucida- 
tions are relevant to our present difficulties. Thus he says 
(p. 217): 

“ In Weyl's theory, a gauge-system is partly physical and 
partly conventional; lengths in different directions but at 
the same point are supposed to be compared by experimental 
(optical) methods; but lengths at different points are not 
supposed to be comparable by physical methods (transfer of 
clocks and rods), and the unit of length at each point is laid 
down by a convention. I think this hybrid definition of 
length is undesirable, and that length should be treated as 
a purely conventional or else a purely physical conception." 

He proceeds to a generalized theory in which, at first, length 
is purely conventional, for comparisons at a point as well as 
for comparisons between different points. This generalized 
theory does not seem to involve the same kind of difficulties 
as those which have been troubling us. The following passage, 
for example, states the matter with great clearness (p. 226) : 

" The relation of displacement between point-events and 
the relation of ‘ equivalence ’ between displacements form 
part of one idea, which are only separated for convenience of 
mathematical manipulation. That the relation of displace- 
ment between A and B amounts to such-and-such a quantity 
conveys no absolute meaning; but that the relation of dis- 
placement between A and B is ‘ equivalent ’ to the relation of 
displacement between C and D is (or at any rate may be) an 
absolute assertion. Thus four points is the minimum number 
for which an assertion of absolute structural relation can be 
made. The ultimate elements of structure are thus four-point 
elements. By adopting the condition of affine geometry, I 
have limited the possible assertion with regard to a four-point 



WEYL'S THEORY 


99 


element to the statement that the four points do, or do not, 
form a parallelogram. The defence of afhne geometry thus 
rests on the not unplausible view that four-point elements 
are recognized to be differentiated from one another by a 
single character — viz. that they are or are not of a particular 
kind which is conventionally named parallelogramical, Then 
the analysis of the parallelogram property into a double 
equivalence of AB to CD and AC to BD, is merely a definition 
of what is meant by the equivalence of displacements.” 

Here we have a logically satisfactory theoretical basis for 
a metric. We may suppose that, as a matter of fact, there are 
important properties of groups of four points which are 
" parallelogramical,” and that actual physical measurement 
is an approximate method of discovering which groups have 
this property. We shall find certain laws approximately 
fulfilled by rough-and-ready measurements, and fulfilled with 
increasing accuracy as we introduce refinements into the 
process of measurement. Consider, for example, Euclid's 
first axiom : Things which are equal to the same thing are equad 
to one another. Presumably Euclid regarded this as a logically 
necessary proposition, and so do people who are engaged in the 
practice of measurement , If two lengths each equal to a metre 
are foimd to be not equal to each other, the plain man assumes 
that there must be a mistake somewhere. We are therefore 
continually redefining the actual operations of measurement 
with a view to verifying Euclid’s first axiom as nearly as 
possible. But with the above-quoted definition of equality 
of length the first axiom becomes a substantial proposition, 
namely: If A BCD is a parallelogram, and likewise DCEF, 
then ABEF is a parallelogram. If this proposition is true, 
then it is theoretically possible to define measurement in such 
a way that two lengths each equal to a metre shall always be 
equal to each other. What is called " accuracy ” is, speaking 
generally, an attempt to obtain a result conformable with 
some ideal standard supposed to be logical but in fact physical. 



lOO 


WEYL’S THEORY 


What do we mean by saying that a length has been " wrongly ” 
measured? Whatever result we obtain from measuring a 
given length, the result represents a fact in the world. But 
in what we call a " wrong ” measurement, the fact ascertained 
is complex and of small universality. If the observer has 
simply misread a scale, the fact ascertained involves reference 
to his psychology. If he has neglected a physical correction — 
e.g. for the temperature of his measure — the fact refers only to 
a measurement carried out with that particular apparatus on 
that particular occasion. In relativity theory we have 
another set of what might be called “ inaccurate ” measure- 
ments — e.g. measurements of the masses of a-particles or 
/7-particles emitted from radio-active bodies must be corrected 
for their motion relative to the observer before they acquire 
any general significance. It is always the search for simple 
relations which enter into general laws that governs successive 
refinements. But the existence of such relations (where they do 
exist) is an empirical fact, so that much that seems pritna fade 
to be logically necessary is really contingent. On the other 
hand, the number of premisses in a deductive system which 
has to agree with an empirical science can, by logical skilly 
be diminished to an extent which may be astonishing. Of 
this, the theory of relativity is a very remarkable example. 
The theory is a combination of two diverse elements; on the 
one hand, new experimental data; on the other, a new logical 
method. It must be regarded as a happy accident that the 
two appeared together; if the right kind of theoretical genius 
had not happened to be forthcoming, we might have had to 
be content for a long time with patched-up hypotheses such 
as the FitzGerald contraction. As it is, the combination of 
experiment and theory has produced one of the supreme 
triumphs of human genius. 



CHAPTER XI 


THE PRINCIPLE OF DIFFERENTIAL LAWS 
Throughout the theory of relativity, there is an application, 
with increasing stringency, of a principle which begins to make 
itself felt in physics with Gahleo, in spite of the fact that he 
did not possess the mathematical technique which it demands. 
The principle I mean is that of “ differential laws,” as it may 
be called. This means that any connection which may exist 
between distant events is the result of integration from a law 
giving a rate of change at every point of some route from the 
one to the other. One may give a simple illustration of a 
differential law from the ” curve of pmsuit ” : a man is walking 
along a straight road, and his dog is in a field beside the road ; 
the man whistles to the dog, and the dog runs towards him. 
We suppose that at each moment the dog runs exactly towards 
where his master is at that moment. To discover the curve 
described by the dog is a problem in integration, which becomes 
definite given certain further data. The Newtonian law of 
gravitation gives a very similar type of law, except that it is 
the acceleration of the planet, not its velocity, that is directed 
towards the sun at each moment. It has long been a common- 
place of physics that its causal laws should have this differential 
character; they should tell primarily a tendency at each 
moment, not the outcome after a finite time. In a word, its 
causal laws take the form of differential equations, usually of 
the second order. 

This view of causal laws is absent from quantum theory, 
from the ideas of savages and imeducated persons, and from 
the works of philosophers, including Bergson and J. S. Mill. 
In quantum theory, we have a discrete series of possible 



THE PRINCIPLE OF DIFFERENTIAL LAWS 


sudden changes, and a certain statistical knowledge of the 
proportion of cases in which each possibility is realized; 
but we have no knowledge as to what determines the occurrence 
of a particular change in a particular case. Moreover, the 
change is not of the sort that can be expressed by differential 
equations : it is a change from a state expressed by one integer 
or set of integers to a state expressed by another. This kind 
of change may turn out to be physically ultimate, and to mark 
out at least a part of physics as governed by laws of a new 
sort. But we are not likely to find science returning to the 
crude form of causality believed in by Fijians and philosophers, 
of which the type is ‘‘ lightning causes thunder.” It can 
never be a law that, given A at one time, there is sure to be B 
at another time, because something might intervene to prevent 
B, We do not derive such laws from quantum phenomena, 
because we do not, in their case, know that A will not continue 
throughout the time in question. The natural view to take 
at present is that quantum phenomena have to do with the 
interchange of energy between matter and the surrounding 
medium, while continuous change is found in all processes 
which involve no such interchange. There are, however, 
difficulties in any view at present, and it is not for a layman 
to venture an opinion. It seems not improbable that, as 
Heisenberg suggests, our views of space-time may have to be 
modified profoimdly before harmony is achieved between 
quantum phenomena and the laws of transmission of light in 
vacuo. For the moment, however, I wish to confine myself 
to the standpoint of relativity theory. 

Although physics has worked with differential equations 
ever since the invention of the calculus, geometry was supposed 
to be able to start with laws applying to finite spaces. If we 
accept the Einsteinian point of view, there can no longer be 
any separation between geometry and physics; every pro- 
position of geometry will be to some extent causal. Take first 



THE PRINCIPLE OF DIFFERENTIAL LAWS 103 

the special theory. Relatively to axes (x, y, z, t) we can obtain 
propositions of geometry by keeping t constant; but relatively 
to other axes these propositions will refer to events at different 
times. It is true that these events, in any system of co- 
ordinates, will have a space-like interval, and will have no 
direct causal relations with each other; but they will have 
indirect causal relations derived from a common ancestry. 
Let us take some example, say: The sum of the angles of a 
triangle is two right angles. Our triangle may be composed 
of rods or of light-rays. In either case, it must preserve a 
certain constancy while we measure it. Both rods and light- 
rays are complicated physical structures, and the physical 
laws of their behaviour are involved in taking them as approx- 
imations to ideal straight lines. Nevertheless, so far as the 
special theory is concerned, all this might be allowed, and yet 
we might maintain a certain distinction between geometry 
and physics, the former being a set of laws supposed exact, 
and approximately verified, for the relations of the x, y, z 
co-ordinates in any Galilean frame when t is kept constant. 

But in the general theory the intermixture of geometry and 
physics is more intimate. We cannot accurately reduce ds* 
to the form : 

- dx^ - dx^ -dx^, 

and therefore we cannot accurately distinguish one co- 
ordinate as representing the time. We cannot therefore 
obtain a timeless geometry by putting *4= constant. With 
this goes a change in our axioms. We no longer have, as in 
Euclid, in Lobatchevsky and Bolyai, and in projective geo- 
metry, axioms dealing with straight lines of finite length. We 
have now only, as our initial apparatus, a geometry of the 
infinitesimal, from which large-scale results must be obtained 
by integration. From this point of view, Weyl’s extension of 
Einstein appears natural. As we saw in the last chapter, 
quoting Eddington, the statement that the distances AB, 



104 THE PRINCIPLE OF DIFFERENTIAL LAWS 


CD are equal is the assertion of a relation between the four 
points, A,B,C, D. If all the relations which constitute our 
initial apparatus are to be confined to the infinitesimal, so 
must this relation ; if so. A, B,C,D must all be close together, 
and Weyl’s geometry results. 

At this point, however, the pure mathematician is likely to 
feel a difficulty which does not greatly trouble the physicist. 
The physicist thinks of his infinitesimals as actual small 
quantities, which may — e.g. in astronomical problems — be 
such as would be reckoned large in other problems. For him, 
therefore, a statement in terms of infinitesimals is quite satis- 
factory. But for the pure mathematician there are no in- 
finitesimals, and all statements in which they seem to occur 
must be expressible as 

¦ limits of what happens to 

finite quantities. To take 
our particular case: We 
must be able to say of a 

small finite quadrilateral 

^ that it is approximately a 

parallelogram, if we are to be able to assign a meaning to the 
statement that an infinitesimal quadrilateral may be accurately 
a parallelogram. The case is exactly analogous to velocity 
in elementary kinematics : we can assign a meaning to velocity 
only because we can measure finite distances and times, and 
so form the conception of the limit of their quotient. It is not 
wholly clear how we are to. satisfy this requirement in the case 
of Weyl’s theory. I think, however, that there is not the 
slightest reason to suppose that it cannot be satisfied. Let 
" R (a, h, c, d) ’’ mean “ a, b, c, d form a parallelogram.” We 
are supposed to have also R{adcb), R{badc), etc., but not 
R{acbd), etc. Also if we have R{abcd) and R{cdzf), we are to 
have R(abfe). But if we take " S (a, b, c, d) ” to mean “ a, b, 
c, d form an approximate parallelogram,” we cannot (if there 



THE PRINCIPLE OF DIFFERENTIAL LAWS 105 


is any way of specifying a degree of approximation) argue 
from S{abcd) and S{cdef) to S(abfe). Now if we assume, as 
Weyl does, that lengths at a given point are comparable, we 
can perhaps give the necessary definitions. We shall have to 
take S, not R, as our fundamental relation, since the distance 
between any two points is finite, and it is assumed that no 
finite quadrilateral can be accurately a parallelogram. Or 
perhaps we shall have to go a step further, and take as funda- 
mental a relation of eight points, say 

(abcd)T{efgh). 

meaning “ abed is more nearly a parallelogram than efgh.” 
We shall then say that, given any four points, a, b, e, /, it is 
possible to find points c, d nearer to b and a respectively than 
e and /are, such that 

(abcd)T{abfe). 


Further, we can say that, if a, b, c, d are sufficiently near 
together, and 

{abcd')T(abcd), 


then the ratio of dd' to dc can be made to approach zero as 
a limit by diminishing the size of abed in a purely ordinal sense. 
(Ordinal relations among points, as we saw earlier, are pre- 
supposed in the theory of relativity.) 

It is highly probable that the above process can be simplified . 
It is, however, of no importance in itself ; its only purpose is 
to show that the derivatives required can be correctly defined, 
and that, however the mathematical treatment may confine 
itself to infinitesimals, relations between points whose distances 
are finite must be presupposed if the infinitesimal calculus is 
to be applicable. 

This last result, whose generality is obvious from the theory 
of limits, is of some philosophical importance. Wherever math- 
ematics works in a continuous medium with relations which 
may be loosely described as next-to-next, there must be other 



io6 THE PRINCIPLE OF DIFFERENTIAL LAWS 


relations, holding between points at finite distances from each 
other, and having the next-to-next relations as their limits. 
Thus, when we say that laws have to be expressed by differ- 
ential equations, we are saying that the finite relations which 
occur cannot be brought under accmrate laws, but only their 
limits as distances are diminished. We are not saying that 
these limits are the physical realities; on the contrary, the 
physical realities continue to be the finite relations. And if our 
theory is to be adequate, some way must be found of so defining 
the finite relations as to make the passage to the limit possible. 

It is considered a merit in the general theory of relativity, 
particularly in Weyl’s form (or the still more general form 
suggested by Eddington), that it dispenses with what we may 
call “ integrated ” relations as regards its fundamentals. 
Thus Eddington, after pointing out that he is concerned with 
structure, not with substance, proceeds (p. 224) : 

“ But structme can be described to some extent ; and when 
reduced to ultimate terms it seems to resolve itself into a 
complex of relations. And further these relations cannot be 
entirely devoid of comparability ; for if nothing in the world is 
comparable with anything else, all parts of it are alike in their 
tmlikeness, and there cannot be even the rudiments of a 
structure. 

“ The axiom of parallel displacement is the expression of 
this comparability, and the comparability postulated seems to 
be almost the minimum conceivable. Only relations which 
are close together — i.€. interlocked in the relation-structure — 
are supposed to be comparable, and the conception of equiva- 
lence is applied to only one type of relation. This comparable 
relation is called displacement. By representing this relation 
graphically we obtain the idea of location in space ; the reason 
why it is natural for us to represent this particular relation 
graphically does not fall within the scope of physics. 

" Thus our axiom of parallel displacement is the geometrical 
garb of a principle which may be called ‘ the comparability of 
proximate relations.’ ” 



THE PRINCIPLE OF DIFFERENTIAL LAWS 107 


It is obvious that, in the above passage, Eddingtcm is 
imagining displacements at a small fiaiite distance from each 
other, not at an infinitesimal distance ; he is not thinking of all 
the apparatus involved in a procedure which replaces infini- 
tesimals by limits. One might suggest that he is supposing, 
e.g., that a footrule will not change much during the portion of 
a second required to transfer it from one part of a given page 
to another. But when we say that it will not change “ much,” 
we imply some standard of quantitative comparison other 
than the footrule; and this leads to the problems we have 
been considering. 

I cannot but think that Eddington’s point of view lends 
itself to development and further analysis by means of 
mathematical logic ; in particular, this applies to the conditions 
for the possibility of measurement, a subject which will be 
considered explicitly in the next chapter. But for the present 
my concern is with “ the comparability of proximate relations.” 
In the first place, what is meant by "comparability”? A 
moment’s reflection shows that what is wanted is a symme- 
trical transitive relation which each of the relations in question 
has to some others, but not to all. (It is assumed, in the 
particular case of Eddington’s general geometry, that when 
there is such a relation of the interval ah to the interval cd, 
there is also such a relation of the interval ad to the interval 
be. But this, as he admits (p. 226), is not essential.) Now 
why should we suppose that a transitive symmetrical relation 
of the above sort is more likely to exist between small intervals 
than between large ones ? I.e., if b' is between a and b, and 
c' between d and c, is it more likely that the relation in question 
will hold between ah' and dc' than between ab and del I do 
not see why we should think so. And I think further that, 
with a correct interpretation of infinitesimals, the whole belief 
that causation must always be from next-to-next becomes 
untenable unless continuity is abandoned. Causal laws may 



i«8 THE PRINCIPLE OF DIFFERENTIAL LAWS 


all be differential equations, but the grounds for thinking that 
they are must be empirical, not a priori. They cannot be 
derived from the impossibility of action at a distance unless 
distance itself is a derivative from causality, which may well 
be the case, but does not represent any part of the views of 
those who are anxious to dispense with action at a distance. 
It may well be, therefore, that there is one department of 
physics — that included in the general theory of relativity, as 
supplemented by Weyl — in which everything proceeds by 
differential equations, while there is another part — that dealt 
with by quantum theory — in which this whole apparatus is 
inapphcable . There is absolutely no a priori reason why every- 
thing should go by differential equations, since, even then, 
causation does not really go from next-to-next : in a continuum 
there is no “next.” It is, at bottom, because " next-to-next ” 
seems natural that we like a procedure of differential equa- 
tions ; but the two are logically incompatible, and our preference 
for the second on account of the first proceeds only from logical 
confusion. 



CHAPTER XII 

MEASUREMENT 

Repeatedly, in previous discussions, we have come up against 
the problem of measurement. It is time to consider it on its 
own account, both how it is to be defined, and in what circum- 
stances it is possible. 

In the first place, what do we mean by measurement ? 
Clearly we do not mean any method of assigning numbers to 
a collection of objects; there must be properties of importance 
connected with the numbers assigned. We do not say that 
the books in the British Museum are " measured " by their 
press-marks. Given any collection whose cardinal number is 
less than or equal to 2K«, we can assign some or all of the real 
numbers as “ press-marks ” of the several members of the 
collection. Given any collection of 2K0 terms, it can be 
arranged in a Euclidean or non-Euclidean space of any known 
sort with any finite number of dimensions, and when so 
arranged it will be amenable to the whole of metrical geometry. 
But the " distance ” between two terms of the collection, when 
it is defined in this way. will, in general, be quite unimportant, 
in the sense that it will have only such properties as follow 
tautologically from its definition, not such further empirical 
properties as would make the definition valuable. So long 
as this is the case, there is no reason to prefer one to another 
of the various incompatible systems of distances which pure 
mathematics would allow us to assign. 

Let us take an illustration. In projective geometry we 
start from a set of axioms which say nothing about quantity, 
and do not even obviously involve order. But it is found that 
they do lead to an order, and that, by means of the order. 



no 


MEASUREMENT 


co-ordinates can be assigned to points. These co-ordinates 
have a definite projective meaning: they represent the series 
of quadrilateral constructions required to reach the point in 
question from certain given initial points. (I omit com- 
plications concerning limits ; these are dealt with in the chapter 
" Projective Geometry " in The Principles of Mathematics.) 
In this case, it may seem doubtful whether we have measure- 
ment or not. We have assigned co-ordinates in a manner 
which preserves the order-relations of points, and it turns out 
that the ordinary distance between two points is a simple 
ftmction of their projective co-ordinates, though the function 
is somewhat different according as space is Euclidean, hyper- 
bolic, or elliptic. It is just because of this difference that we 
shall not say we have " measured ” distances when we have 
introduced projective co-ordinates. These co-ordinates, for 
example, will not tell us, even approximately, how long it 
would take to walk from one place to another, and this is the 
sort of thing that measurement ought to teff us. 

What, then, is meant when it is said that, in the theory of 
relativity, there is a metrical relation of interval ? Let us take 
up the matter at the point where Eddington leaves it. He 
suggests that all that is needed is “ comparability ” between 
two point-pairs, or, as he says, between two “ displacements." 
(We may leave aside for the moment the question whether this 
is only to hold for point-pairs which are very near together.) 
This language seems somewhat vague; let us try to give it 
precision. 

Suppose that between two point-pairs there is sometimes, 
but not always, a symmetrical transitive relation S. Then 
we can define as “ the distance between x and y " the class of 
all point-pairs having the relation 5 to (xy). If now instead 
of {xy)S(zw) we write xy—zw, we shall have: 

If xy=zw, then zw—xy. 

If xy=zw and xw=uv, then xy==uv. 



MEASUREMENT 


III 


From these two it follows that every pair of objects x,yin the 
field of 5 is such that 

xy^xy. 

This seems to be as much as is strictly implied by Eddington’s 
words, but it is certainly not all that we need. Nor does it 
become sufficient if we add : 

If xy=zw, then xz=yw. 

There must be a connection between distances and ordinal 
relations, there must be ways of adding distances, and there 
must be ways of inferring new distances from a certain number 
of data, as in ds*=Eg^x^dx,. If all these conditions are 
fulfilled, we can then proceed to ask whether our distances have 
any further important physical properties. 

The sort of relation that will not do is illustrated if we 
take xy = zw io mean that xy and zw have the same apparent 
dimensions in the visual field of a certain observer — e.g. the 
diameters of the sun and moon will approximately have this 
relation, which is symmetrical and transitive, but physically 
unimportant. Let us see what is necessary in order to get 
a definition of distance which will have as many as possible of 
the properties possessed by distance in elementary geometry. 

If we confine ourselves to three dimensions, we can at once 
define a plane: it will consist of all points equidistant from two 
given points. The points in this plane which are equidistant 
from two given points in it lie on a straight line; we may take 
this as the definition of a straight line. Thus given two points, 
P, Q, we can define the middle point M of PQ‘, it is the point 
on PQ which is equidistant from P and Q. We shall need an 
axiom to the effect that this point always exists and is always 
unique. Thus we can halve distances and double them: we 
shall of course define PM as half of PQ. From this point 
onwards, the assignment of numerical measures to our distances 
offers no difficulty. It is therefore only necessary to scrutinize 
what has already been said. 



MEASUREMENT 


II2 

In ordinary Euclidean geometry, there is exactly one point 
on a plane which is equidistant from three given points on the 
plane; it is the centre of the circumscribed circle. In three 
dimensions, there is one point equidistant from four given 
points; in four, from five. This last holds also in the special 
theory of relativity, and even in the general theory so long as 
the distances concerned are small. If we take a point {d{Xi, 
djXj, iiXj, near the origin, another point (ijCj, ix,, dx^, dx^ 
is equidistant from this point and the origin if Sg^^x^d^Xy^ d^s* 
(where theg^„ have their values at the origin), which is a simple 
equation in dx^,. Four such equations give a unique set of 
values for {dx^, dx^, dx^, dx^. Thus there is just one point 
equidistant from five given points close together. Moreover, 
a simple equation, which we may take to be that of the part 
of a plane near the origin, gives the locus of points near the 
origin and equidistant from it and a neighbouring point. In 
fact, as we should expect, for small distances everything pro- 
ceeds as in elementary geometry, given the formula for ds*. 

But the mere assumption that there is such a relation as 5 
between point-pairs does not yield these results, since it does 
not imply the interrelation of distances which is given by the 
formula for ds*. Nevertheless, it does suffice theoretically as 
a basis of measurement, since, as we have seen, it enables us to 
halve distances and double them, and therefore to assign 
numbers to them. This shows that the geometry of relativity, 
even in its most general and abstract form, assumes a good 
deal more than the mere possibility of measurement, which, in 
itself, is of very little value. In itself, it does not lead to 
a geometry; this only results when there is some intercon- 
nection between different measures. 

It may be asked whether, when the geometry of relativity is 
generalized to the utmost, any genuinely quantitative element 
remains in its formulae. We start with an ordered four- 
dimensional manifold, and we assign co-ordinates subject to 



MEASUREMENT 


the sole restriction that their order-relations are to reproduce 
t hose of the given manifold. We then proceed to find formulae 
(tensor-equations) which hold equally in all systems of co- 
ordinates satisfying the above condition. It might seem a 
possibility that such formulae really express only ordinal 
relations, and that the sole advantage of co-ordinates lies in 
the fact that they provide names for the terms of a mamifold 
of the required sort. (They do not provide names for all of 
them ; the niimber of names is Ko, and therefore only a vanishing 
proportion of real numbers can be named — i.e. expressed by 
meams of a formula of finite complexity which employs 
integers.) This possibility requires investigation. 

The problem can be discussed equally well in two dimensions. 
In Gauss’s theory of surfaces, a sphere and an ellipsoid, e.g., 
are distinguishable by the fact that there is an irreducible 
difference between the formulae for ds* which hold for the two 
surfaces when expressed in terms of two co-ordinates; this 
expresses the fact that the measure of curvature is constant 
in the case of the sphere, but not in the case of the ellipsoid. 
Yet from a purely ordinal point of view, such as that of 
analysis situs, the two figures are indistinguishable. What, 
exactly, is added to make the difference ? This problem is 
essentially the same as that which airises in the general theory 
of relativity. 

In part, the answer in this case is simple. What is added 
is the comparability of distances in different directions. So 
long as our apparatus is purely ordinal, we can say of three 
points which have the order ABC that B is nearer to A than 
C is, but we cannot say anything analogous of three points 
which are not in a row — I do not say “ in a straight line,” 
because the concept involved is more general, as will appear 
later. But although this is part of the answer, it does not 
seem to be the whole, since our relation 5 also enabled us to 
compare distances not having a common origin. 



MEASUREMENT 


114 

It seems that what distinguishes distance as required in 
geometry from such a relation as “ subtending a given angle 
'at a given point " is the absence of reference to anything 
external. When the distance between two points is equal to 
the distance between two others, we are supposed to have a 
fact which does not demand reference to some other point or 
points. In fact, this is the reason why the " interval ” has 
been substituted for distance; the latter, as hitherto con- 
ceived, was found to depend upon the motion of the co-ordinate 
frame, and thus to be not an intrinsic geometrical relation. 
The distance, if it is to serve its purpose, must be a function 
of the two points exclusively, and must not involve any other 
geometrical data. Here, for relativity purposes, “ geometry '' 
includes “ kinematics.” The angle which two points subtend 
at a given point becomes a function of three points as soon as 
the given point is thought of as variable. There must be 
no such way of turning the distance between two points into 
a function involving other variables also. 

I am not sure, however, whether it is necessary to introduce 
this somewhat difficult consideration. In ordinary geometry, 
the points at a given distance from a given point lie on the 
surface of a sphere ; but if we define the distance PQ as the 
angle POQ, where O is a fixed point, the points at a given 
distance from P lie on a cone. Now a sphere and a cone are 
distinguishable in analysis situs. Thus the above undesirable 
definition could be excluded by insisting that points at a given 
distance from a given point are to form an oval figure. In 
relativity theory, this is not true of points having zero interval 
from a given point ; indeed, it is only true when the interval 
concerned is space-like. But it is possible to specify the 
characteristics, for analysis situs, of the three-dimensional 
surface of constant distance from a given point. 'These might 
be added to the postulate that distance exists. Whether, in 
some such way, we could overcome the apparent necessity for 



MEASUREMENT 


15 


distinguishing between a sphere and an ellipsoid, making the 
difference relative to the definition of distance, I do not feel 
sure, though obviously the question must be easily soluble. 

Every principle of measurement which is to be used in 
practice must be such that important empirical laws are 
connected with measures. There will always be an infinite 
number of ways of correlating numbers with the members of 
a class whose cardinal number is less than or equal to 2K0. 
Some of these may be important, but most must be imim- 
portant. Some conditions can be laid down. In the first 
place, the members of the class concerned may be obviously 
capable of an order which is causally important. If we take 
all the patches of colour that ever have been or will be per- 
ceived, they have in the first place an order in space-time, 
which is obviously important causally; in this order, no two 
of them occupy the same position — i.e. the relations concerned 
are all asymmetrical. But they have also an order as shades 
of colour and as of varying brightness. In this order there are 
symmetrical transitive relations — e.g. between two patches of 
exactly the same shade. Physics professes to correlate also 
these further characteristics of colours with spatio-temporal 
quantities such as wave-lengths. This would not be plausible 
if continuous alterations of quality were not correlated with 
continuous alterations in the correlated physical quantities. 
Whenever we notice a qualitative series, such as that of 
colours of the rainbow, we assume that it must have causal 
importance, and we insist that numbers used as measures shall 
have the same order as the qualities which they measure. The 
former is a postulate, the latter a convention. Both have 
proved highly successful, but neither is an a priori necessity. 

There are orders which are obviously of no causal im- 
portance — e.g. alphabetical order among human beings. 
Human beings, like colours, have various orders that are 
causally important — the space-time order, order of height. 



MEASUREMENT 


ii6 

weight, income, intelligence as measured by Professor X’s 
tests, etc. But alphabetical order would never be thought 
important ; no one would hope to found a biometric calculus 
upon a system in which a human being had co-ordinates 
depending upon the alphabetical order of his name. Generally 
speaking, it would seem that the simplest relations are the 
most important. Here I am using a purely logical test of 
simplicity: taking propositions in which the given relation 
occurs, there will be some having the smallest number of 
constituents compatible with the mention of that relation ; and 
again, a relation may be a molecular compound of other 
relations — i.e. a disjunction, conjunction, negation, or complex 
of all these. A relation which is molecular has always a 
certain definite number of atoms; a relation which is not 
molecular is called atomic, and has then a definite number of 
terms in the simplest propositions in which it occurs. An 
atomic relation is simpler in proportion to the fewness of its 
terms; a molecular relation, in proportion to the fewness of its 
atoms. There is much empirical reason to think that the laws 
of a science become more important and comprehensive as the 
relations involved become simpler. The relation of a man 
to his name is of immense complexity, whereas we may suppose 
that the relation upon which interval depends is fairly simple. 
And the qualitative order of colours alluded to above is also 
simple, so long as we are thinking of colours as given in per- 
ception, not as interpreted in physics. Such simple relations 
should, as far as possible, be the basis for systems of measure- 
ment. 

There is a traditional distinction between extensive and in- 
tensive quantities, which is somewhat misleading when taken 
seriously. The theory is that extensive quantities are com- 
posed of parts and intensive quantities are not. The only truly 
extensive quantities are numbers and classes. Where finite 
classes are concerned, the number of their terms may be taken 



MEASUREMENT 


117 


as a measure of them, and they have parts corresponding to all 
smaller numbers. But in geometry we are never concerned 
with quantities which have parts. The number of points in 
a volume, whether large or small, is always 2 **® in the usual 
kinds of geometry; thus magnitude has nothing to do with 
number. Interval, as we have seen, is a relation, and smaller 
intervals are not parts of it. If AB and BC are equal intervals 
in a straight line, we say that the interval AC is double of 
each, and we think of it as the “ sum ” of AB and BC. But it 
is only by a convention, though an almost irresistible one, that 
we assign as the measure of .4C a number double that which 
we assign as the measure of AB or of BC. And to say that 
AC is the “ sum ” of AB and BC is to say something very 
ambiguous, since the word “sum” has many meanings. When 
AB and BC are considered as vectors, we may say that AC is 
their siun even when they are not in one straight line. Again, 
given suitable definitions, we may say that the points between 
A and C are the sum (in the logical sense) of the points between 
A and B, and between B and C ; this will only hold if ABC is 
a straight line. But the distauice between A and C, considered 
as a relation, is not properly the “ sum,” in any recognized 
sense, of the distances AB, BC. Thus all geometrical quanti- 
ties are “ intensive.” This shows that the distinction of 
intensive and extensive is unimportant. 

In connection with interval, it is worth while to compare its 
formal characteristics with those of similarity. We saw that, 
in the generalized geometry with which Eddington ends, we 
want a relation of four neighbouring points, expressing the fact 
that they form a parallelogram. But we met with certain 
difficulties owing to the fact that this is only supposed to be 
possible for an inhnitesimal quadrilateral, which is a figment 
of the mathematical imagination, and that it was not wholly 
easy to see how to substitute a procedme by means of limits. 
We were led to the suggestion that, instead of saying " abed 



MEASUREMENT 


ii8 

is a parallelogram,” we should have to say " abed is more nearly 
a parallelogram than efgh.” Perhaps this could be somewhat 
simplified. Suppose we say: “abed' is more nearly a paral- 
lelogram than abed." And perhaps this could be still further 
simplified so as to take the form: “ed' is more like ba than ed 
is.” We here suppose that between any two points there is 
a relation, which we will not call distance, but (say) " separa- 
tion,” and that this relation, like a shade of colour, is capable 
of a greater or less resemblance to another of the same kind. 
In a Euclidean space, two finite separations finitely separated 
may be exactly similar in the relevant respects; we then have 
a finite parallelogram. But in the generalized geometry that 
we are considering, we shall say that no two separations are 
exactly alike, though they 
are capable of indefinite 
approximation to exact 
likeness. Let us see how 
fjir this will take us. 

In the case of similarity, 
we have a relation which is 
capable of degrees, and may be called " quasi-transitive ” — i.e. 
if A is very like B, and B is very like C, then A must be rather 
like C. This is just the sort of thing required for Weyl’s 
geometry. Consider four points, a, b, c, d, and suppose that 
is rather like ed. T ake a series of points forming a continuous 
route from c to d, without loops; this can be done by purely 
ordinal methods to be explained later. Suppose that among 
these points there are some, such as d', which make cd' more 
like ab than cd is. We may suppose that these points have a 
limit or last term, which we will call d'. We can then similarly 
proceed along ad' to a point d” which gives cd" more like ab 
than for any other point on ad'. We have then done nearly as 
well as possible, if not quite, with the three points a, b, c as 
starting-points. By means of suitable postulates, we could 




MEASUREMENT 


119 


insure that a construction of the above sort, carried out 
repeatedly without changing the points a, b, c, should at last 
end with a definite point such that erf, is more like ab than 
any other distance from c is. We may call the figure a6crf, 
a "quasi-parallelogram.” Now let x^, ... V ... be 
a series of points on a route from b to a. Then proceed to take 
points yi, ya, ... between b and c on some route, and form 
the quasi-parallelograms having one comer at b, one comer 
at and one at y„, the fourth being called z*,. If, as Weyl 
assumes, infinitesimal distances which have one end in common 
are comparable, this must be taken to mean that two small 
finite distances are capable of a resemblance which may be 


called " quasi-equality,” 
which grows more nearly ^ 

d. 

complete resemblance J 

CX-— A 

as the distance grows ^ / J 

smaller. We may as- y 1 

'v' \ 

sume, as before, that, j 

\ " \ 

given a point Xi and 
a definite route from ' 

z,, \z,j 


b to c, there will be ^ ^ ^ 


one definite point on this route such that by^ is more 
nearly equal to bx^ than is any other distance by on the 
route in question. We shall then say that bxy_ and iy^ are 
"quasi-equal.” Take also x^x^, x^^ ... quasi-equal, and 
yiyv y»ys • • • quasl-equal. In this way we can constmet 
a co-ordinate mesh with axes ba, be. And we can now con- 
struct what win be in effect straight lines through b : take all 
the points z which are the comers opposite to b of quasi- 
parallelograms bx„zy„, for different initial points x^, y^, subject 
to quasi-equality between bx^ and by^. These points may be 
regarded as forming the quasi-straight line whose equation is 
xj‘m=yln. (Irrationals can be dealt with by the usual 
methods.) This quasi-straight line will start from 6 in a 



120 


MEASUREMENT 


certain direction, and may. for differential purposes, be re- 
garded as really a straight line. It is not worth while to 
proceed further, since it is obvious that we have the necessary 
material. 

Degrees of similarity may be, in a sense, measured by quasi- 
transitiveness. Suppose that . • • each have 

quasi-equality with the next. It may or may not happen 
that bx^ has quasi-equality withy^Zi^. One may presume that 
this will happen if hx^ and by^ are very small and n is not very 
large. Similarly, or rather a fortiori, we cannot infer that 
6x„ has quasi-equality with hy^. The larger the value of m 
for which such an inference remains true, the closer is the 
resemblance between bx^ and by^, or between bx^ and yiZn- 
It is to be assumed that, by continually diminishing bx^ and 
byi, the number of steps for which the inference is permitted 
can be increased without finite limit. 

If the above is in any degree valid, it would seem that, if 
space-time is continuous, spatio-temporal measurement de- 
pends theoretically upon qualitative similarity, capable of vary- 
ing degrees, between relations of pairs of points. It is not 
suggested that the analysis cannot be carried further, but only 
that this is a valid stage in the process of explaining what is 
meant by the quantitative character of intervals and by their 
measurement as numerical multiples of units. 



CHAPTER XIII 
MATTER AND SPACE 

Common sense starts with the notion that there is matter 
where we can get sensations of touch, but not elsewhere. Then 
it gets puzzled by wind, breath, clouds, etc., whence it is led 
to the conception of " spirit ” — I speak etymologically. After 
“ spirit ¦' has been replaced by " gas,” there is a further stage, 
that of the aether. Assuming the continuity of physical pro- 
cesses, there must be things happening between the earth and 
the sun when light travels from the stm to the earth; assuming 
the mediaeval metaphysic of “ substance,” as all physicists did 
until recently, what is happening between the earth and the 
sun must be happening “ in ” or " to ” a substance, which is 
called the aether. 

Apart from metaphysical interpretations, what we may 
be said to know (using this word somewhat liberally) is that 
processes occur where there is no gross matter, and that these 
processes proceed, at least approximately, in accordance with 
Maxwell’s equations. There does not seem any necessity to 
interpret these processes in terms of substance; indeed, I shall 
argue that processes associated with gross matter should also 
be interpreted so as not to involve substance. There must, 
however, remain a difference, expressible in physical terms, 
between regions where there is matter and other regions. In 
fact, we know the difference. The law of gravitation is dif- 
ferent, and the laws of electromagnetism suffer a discontinuity 
when we reach the surface of an electron or proton. These 
differences, however, are not of a metaphysical kind. To the 
philosopher, the difference between “ matter ” and " empty 
space ” is, I believe, merely a difference as to the causal laws 
governing successions of events, not a difference expressible 



MATTER AND SPACE 


as that between the presence or absence of substance, or as that 
between one kind of substance and another. 

Physics, as such, should be satished when it hats ascertained 
the equations according to which a process takes place, with 
just enough interpretation to know what experimental 
evidence confirms or confutes the equations. It is not 
necessary to the physicist to speculate as to the concrete 
character of the processes with which he deals, though hypo- 
theses (false as well as true) on this subject may sometimes be 
a help to further valid generalizations. For the present, we 
are confining ourselves to the standpoint of physics. Whether 
anything further can be known or fruitfully conjectured is a 
matter which we shall discuss at a later stage. We want, 
therefore, to consider the difference in physical formulae which 
is described as that between the presence and absence of 
matter, and also to consider briefly the difficulties as to the 
interchanges of energy between matter and empty space. I 
say “ empty space ” or " aether ” indifferently; the difference 
seems to be merely one of words. 

One way of approaching this subject is through the con- 
nection of mass with energy.* In elementary dynamics, the 
two are quite distinct, but nowadays they have become 
amalgamated. There are two kinds of mass involved in 
physics, of which one may be called the “ invariant ” mass, 
the other the " relative ” mass. The latter is the mass ob- 
tained by measurement, when the body concerned may be 
moving relatively to the observer; the former is the mass 
obtained when the body is at rest relatively to the observer. 
If we call the invariant mass m and the relative mass M, then, 
taking the velocity of light as unity, if v is the velocity of the 
body relative to the observer, we have : 


See E;ddington, op. cit., §§ lo. ii. 



MATTER AND SPACE 


123 


Thus M increases as v increases; if v is the velocity of light, 
M becomes infinite if m is finite. In fact, the invariant mass 
of light is zero, and its relative mass is finite. Wherever energy 
is associated with matter, there is a finite invariant mass m ; 
but where energy is in “ empty space,” m is zero. This might 
be regarded as a definition of the difference between matter 
and empty space. 

It will be seen that, if v is small, so that t;* and higher powers 
can be neglected, the above equation becomes approximately 

Now jmv* is the kinetic energy. Thus the change of Af with 
changes of motion is the same as the change of the kinetic 
energy. But energy is fixed only to the extent of its changes, 
not in its absolute amount. Hence M may be identified with 
the energy . And this suggests further that the usual definition 
of energy is only an approximation, which holds when v is 
small. The accurate formula for energy is 
m 

Vi'-'v* 

— i.e. accurately the same as M. 

The conservation of energy is the conservation of M, not 
olm -,m also is approximately conserved, but not exactly. E.g. 
there is a loss of m when four protons and two electrons com- 
bine to form a helium nucleus. The term ” invariant ” refers 
to changes of co-ordinates, not to constancy throughout time. 

It is necessary to say something about the difiScuIties of 
reconciling the laws governing the propagation of light with 
those governing interchanges of energy between light and 
atoms. On this subject the present position of physics is one 
of perplexity, aptly summarized by Dr Jeans in Atomicity and 
Quanta (Cambridge, 1926) and by Dr C. D. EUis in Nature, 
June 26, 1926, pp. 895-7. The wave theory of light accounts 
adequately for all phenomena in which only light is concerned. 



124 


MATTER AND SPACE 


such as interference and difiraction : but it fails to account for 
quantum phenomena such as the photo-electric effect (see 
Chapter IV.). On the other hand, theories which account for 
the quantum phenomena seem imable to accoimt for the very 
things which the wave theory explains perfectly. 

Some of the difficulties of the light-quantum theory are set 
forth as follows by Dr Jeans {pp. cit., pp. 29, 30) : 

" If, however, radiation is to be compared to rifle bullets, 
we know both the number and size of these bullets . We know , 
for instance, how much energy there is in a cubic centimetre 
of bright sunlight, and if this energy is the aggregate of the 
energies of individual quanta, we know the energy of each 
quantum (since we know the frequency of the light) and so can 
calculate the number of quanta in the cubic centimetre. The 
number is found to be about ten millions. By a similar calcula- 
tion it is found that the light from a sixth magnitude star 
comprises only about one quantum per cubic metre, and the 
light from a sixteenth magnitude star, only about one quantum 
per ten thousand cubic metres. Thus if light travels in 
indivisible quanta like bullets, the quanta from a sixteenth 
magnitude star can only enter a terrestrial telescope at com- 
paratively rare intervals, and it will be exceedingly rare for 
two or more quanta to be inside the telescope at the same 
time. A telescope of double the aperture ought to trap the 
quanta four times as frequently, but there should be no other 
difference. This, as Lorentz pointed out in 1906, is quite at 
variance with our everyday experience. When the light of a 
star passes through a telescope and impresses an image on a 
photographic plate, this image is not confined to a single 
molecule or to a close cluster of molecules as it would be if 
individual quanta left their marks like bullets on a target. An 
elaborate and extensive diffraction pattern is formed; the 
intensity of the pattern depends on the number of quanta, but 
its design depends on the diameter and also on the shape of the 
object-glass. Moreover, the design does not bear any re- 
semblance whatever to the ‘ trial and error ’ design which is 
observed on a target battered by bullets. It seems impossible 
to reconcile this with the hypothesis that quanta travel like 



MATTER AND SPACE 


125 


bullets directly from one atom of the star to one molecule of the 
photographic plate.” 

The difficulties of the wave-theory, on the other hand, are 
illustrated by Dr Ellis as follows: 

" To take a definite case, suppose X-rays are incident on 
a plate of some material, then it is found that electrons are 
ejected from the plate with considerable velocities. The 
number of the electrons depends on the intensity of the X-rays 
and diminishes in the usual way as the plate is moved farther 
from the source of X-rays. The velocity or energy of each 
electron, however, does not vary, but depends only on the 
frequency of the X-rays. The electrons are found to have the 
same energy whether the material from which they come is close 
to the X-ray bulb or whether it is removed away to any distance. 

“ This is a result which is quite incompatible with the 
ordinary wave-theory of radiation, because as the distance 
from the source increases the radiation spreading out on all 
sides becomes weaker and weaker, the electric forces in the 
wave-front diminishing as the inverse square of the distance. 
The experimental result that the photo-electron always picks 
up the same amount of energy from the radiation could only 
be accounted for by giving it the power either to collect energy 
from a large volume or to collect energy for a long time. Both 
of these assumptions are unworkable, and the only conclusion 
is that the radiated energy must be localized in small bundles. 

" This is the basis of the light-quantum theory. Light of 
frequency v is considered to consist of small bundles or quanta 
of energy all identical and of magnitude hv, h being Planck’s 
constant. These quanta travel through space, being unaffected 
by each other, and preserving their own individuality until they 
make a suitable collision with an atom.” 

After setting forth the difficulties encountered by this theory 
in regard to interference and diffraction. Dr Ellis proceeds to 
the very interesting suggestion made by Professor G. N. Lewis 
in Nature, February 13, 1926, p. 236. “ It is a striking fact,’’ 
says Dr Ellis, summarizing this suggestion, “ that while all 
the theories are directed towards explaining the propagation of 



126 


MATTER AND SPACE 


light, one theory suggesting that it occurs in the form of waves, 
the other in the form of corpuscles, yet light has never been 
observed in empty space. It is quite impossible to observe 
light in the course of propagation; the only events that can 
ever be detected are the emission and absorption of light. 
Until there is some atom to absorb the radiation we must be 
unaware of its existence. In other words, the difficulty of 
explaining the propagation of light may be because we are 
endeavouring to explain something about which we have no 
experimental evidence. It might be more correct to interpret 
the experimental facts quite directly and to say that one atom 
can transfer energy to another atom although they may be 
far apart, in a manner analogous to the transference of energy 
between two atoms which collide.” 

Professor Lewis’s theory suggests that we should take 
seriously the fact that the interval between two parts of a 
light-ray is zero, so that its point of departure and its point 
of arrival may be regarded as, in some sense, in contact. In 
a passage quoted by Dr Ellis, he says : 

" I shall make the contrary assumption that an atom never 
emits light except to another atom, and that in this process, 
which may rather be called a transmission than an emission, 
the atom which loses energy and the atom which gains energy 
play co-ordinate and symmetrical parts.” 

In a later letter to Nature (December i8, 1926), Professor 
Lewis suggests that light is carried by corpuscles of a new sort, 
which he calls ” photons.” He supposes that, when light 
radiates, what happens is that a photon travels ; but at other 
times the photon is a structural element within an atom. The 
photon, he says, “ is not light, but plays an essential part in 
every process of radiation.” He assigns to the photon the 
following properties: “ (i) In any isolated system the total 
number of photons is constant. (2) All radiant energy is 
carried by photons, the only difference between the radiation 



MATTER AND SPACE 


127 


from a wireless station and from an X-ray tube being that the 
former emits a vastly greater number of photons, each carrying 
a very much smaller amount of energy. (3) All photons are 
intrinsically identical. ... (4) The energy of an isolated 

photon, divided by the Planck constant, gives the frequency of 
the photon. ... (5) All photons are alike in one property 

which has the dimensions of action or of angular momentum, 
and is invariant to a relativity transformation. (6) The 
condition that the frequency of a photon emitted by a certain 
system be equal to some physical frequency existing within 
that system, is not in general fulfilled, but comes nearer to 
fulfilment the lower the frequency is.” Professor Lewis 
promises to deal with difficulties in the way of his hypothesis 
on a future occasion. 

Professor Lewis’s view is perhaps less radical than the view 
which it suggests — namely, that nothing whatever happens 
between the emission of light by one atom and its absorption 
by another. Whether this view is Professor Lewis’s or not, it 
deserves to be considered, for although it is revolutionary, it 
may well prove to be right. If so, " empty space ” is 
practically abolished. There will be need of a considerable 
labour if physics is to be re-written in accordance with this 
theory, but what is said about the necessary absence of 
evidence concerning light in t^^lnsit is a powerful consideration. 
It is common in science to find hypotheses which, from a 
theoretical point of view, are unnecessarily complicated, 
because people cannot sufficiently divest themselves of common- 
sense prejudices. Why should we suppose that anything at 
all happens between the emission of light and its absorption ? 
One might be inclined to attach weight to the fact that light 
travels with a certain velocity. But relativity has made this 
argument less convincing than it once was. Everything that 
has to do with the velocity of light is capable of being inter- 
preted in a ” Pickwickian ” sense, and in any case our pre- 



128 


MATTER AND SPACE 


judices must be shocked. It is of course premature to adopt 
such an hypothesis definitively, and I shall continue to suppose 
that light does really travel across an intervening region. 
But it will be wise to remember the possibility, and to bear in 
mind the great changes in our imaginative picture of the world 
that are compatible with our existing physical knowledge. 

The picture presented by this development of Professor Lewis’s 
suggestion would be something like this : the world contains 
bits of matter (electrons and protons) possessing various 
amounts of energy. Sometimes energy is transferred from one 
of these bits of matter to another ; usually this process has been 
thought to be casual, like the wandering of thistledown, but 
it is fotmd to be more like the parcels post, in the sense that 
the energy has a definite destination. It is now suggested that 
there is no postman, because, if there were, he would be as 
magical as Santa Claus; the alternative is to suppose that the 
energy passes inunediately from one piece of matter to another. 
It is true that, by the clock, there is a lapse of time between the 
departure of the energy from the source and its arrival at its 
destination. But there is no interval in the relativity sense, 
and the lapse of time will vary according to the co-ordinate 
system employed — i.e. according to the way in which the clock 
is moving. I do not know how the view we are considering 
will account for the time taken by a double journey to a re- 
flector and back, which is not purely conventional. Nor do I 
know what will happen to the conservation of energy if light 
caimot be radiated into the void. This latter argument, 
however, is not serious, since light which never hits a piece of 
matter is in any case purely hypothetical. I am not sure, 
either, that the theory is intended to be as radical as I have 
suggested; perhaps it is only meant that light never starts on 
a journey without having a destination in view. In this form, 
however, the theory would seem scarcely credible : we should 
have to suppose that matter could exercise a mysterious 



MATTER AND SPACE 


129 

attraction from a distance, which would undo the gain derived 
from Einstein's theory of gravitation. Perhaps the theory may 
have gained undue plausibility from a belief that the whole 
geometry of space-time depended upon interval, whereas in 
fact there is a space-time order which is not derivable from 
interval, and which, as presupposed in relativity theory, does 
not regard as contiguous parts of a light ray which would 
ordinarily be regarded as widely separated.* Perhaps it may 
be possible to avoid these difficulties, but, if so, a very great 
theoretical reconstruction will be necessary. Meanwhile it 
must be regarded as still possible that some less revolutionary 
theory may solve the difficulties connected with the inter- 
change of energy between light and bodies. 

There are three papers by Einstein which discuss the possi- 
bility of obtaining quantum laws as consequences of a modified 
relativity theory.f These papers do not arrive at any definite 
conclusion confidently asserted; but they suffice to show that 
the problem of combining quantum laws with those of gravita- 
tional and electromagnetic fields is not a hopeless one, a view 
which is strengthened by Mr L. V. King’s theory alluded to 
above (Chapter I V .) . So long as it is not known to be hopeless, 
it is perhaps rash to fly to heroic solutions of the problem. 
And it is as yet by no means universally admitted that the 
wave-theory of light is inadequate in its own domain ; Dr Jeans 
{loc. cit.) , for example, regau-ds the hypothesis of light-quanta as 
unnecessary for reasons which demand serious consideration. 
We must therefore await further knowledge before venturing 
upon a definite opinion. 

* On this matter, cf. Eddington, op. cit., § 98 (pp. 224 - 6 ). 

f Bietet die Feldtheorie Moglichkeiten Jiir die Losvng des Quariten- 
problems ? Sitzungsberichte der preussischen Akademie der Wissen- 
sebaften, I9*3. PP- 359-&4. QmnUnVteorie des einatomigen idealen 



CHAPTER XIV 

THE ABSTRACTNESS OF PHYSICS 
Before embarking upon the epistemological discussions which 
will concern us in Part II., it will be well to draw some morals 
from our previous chapters. Throughout these chapters, I 
have carefully abstained from speculations which would have 
taken us outside the domain of physics; in particular, I have 
not sought to interpret the mathematically fundamental notions 
of physics in terms of entities not directly amenable to ordinary 
mathematical treatment. It seemed desirable to be clear first 
as to what physics has to say, before undertaking either the 
epistemological criticism of the evidence or the metaphysical 
interpretation of the logically primitive apparatus of physics. 
This is the purpose of the present chapter. 

Physics started historically, and still starts in the education 
of the young, with matters that seem thoroughly concrete. 
Levers and pulleys, falling bodies, collisions of billiard balls, 
etc,, are all familiar in everyday life, and it is a pleasure to the 
scientifically-minded youth to find them amenable to mathema- 
tical treatment. But in proportion as physics increases the 
scope and power of its methods, in that same proportion it robs 
its subject-matter of concreteness. The extent to which this 
is the case is not always realized, at any rate in unprofessional 
moments, even by the physicist himself; he may tell you that 
he can “ see ” an electron hitting a screen, which is of course 
a telescoped expression for a complicated inference. Dr 
Whitehead has done more than any other author to show the 
need of undoing the abstractions of physics. For the moment, 
I am not concerned with this need, but with the abstractions 
themselves. 

130 



THE ABSTRACTNESS OF PHYSICS 


'31 


Let us take space, time, light and matter as illustrative of 
the gradually increasing abstractness of physics. These four 
notions are all extracted from common sense. We see objects 
spread out in space, we can feel their shapes with our fingers; 
we know what it is to walk to a neighbouring town or travel 
to a neighbouring country. All this makes “ space ” seem 
something familiar and easy, until, in the course of education, 
we learn the puzzles to which it has given rise. Time seems 
equally obvious: we remember past events in a time-order 
we notice day and night, summer and winter, youth and age, 
we know that history relates events of previous epochs, we 
insure our lives in the confident expectation that we shall die 
in the future. Light, again, seemed in no way mysterious 
to the author of Genesis, as, indeed, how should it to anyone 
who had experienced the difference between night and day ? 
Matter was equally obvious: it was primarily anything that 
we could touch, though the first step towards mystification 
was taken when Empedocles included air. However, we are 
conscious of air in the form of wind and as something that 
fills otu lungs, so that less effort was required to admit air 
among the elements than to exclude fire. 

From this happy fauniUarity with the everyday world physics 
has been gradually driven by its own triumphs, Uke a monarch 
who has grown too grand to converse with his subjects. The 
space-time of relativity is very far removed from the space and 
time of our unscientific experience; yet even space-time is 
nearer to common sense than the conceptions towards which 
physics is tending. “ Space and time,” says Eddington,* 
“ are only approximate conceptions, which must ultimately 
give way to a more general conception of the ordering of events 
in nature not expressible in terms of a fourfold co-ordinate 
system. It is in this direction that some physicists hope to 
find a solution of the contradictions of the quantum theory. 
* op. cit., p. 225. 



132 THE ABSTRACTNESS OF PHYSICS 

It is a fallacy to think that the conception of location in space- 
time based on the observation of large-scale phenomena can be 
applied unmodihed to the happenings which involve only a 
small number of quanta. Assuming that this is the right 
solution it is useless to look for any means of introducing 
quantum phenomena into the later formulae of our theory; 
these phenomena have been excluded at the outset by the 
adoption of a co-ordinate frame of reference.” But even if 
space-time, as it appears in the general theory of relativity, 
were the last word as regards the physical order corresponding 
to our usual notions of space and time, it is evident that we 
should have travelled very far from those notions, and have 
arrived at a region in which pictorial imagination is useless. 

The view of Locke, that the secondary qualities are sub- 
jective but not the primary qualities, was more or less com- 
patible with physics until very recent times. There are spaces 
and times in our immediate experience, and there seemed no 
insuperable obstacle to identifying them with the spaces and 
times of the physical world. In regard to time, at least, 
practically no one doubted the rightness of this identification. 
There were doubts as regards space, but they came from 
psychologists rather than physicists. Now, however, both 
space and time, as they occur in immediate experience, are 
recognized by writers on relativity as something quite different 
from the space-time which physics requires. Locke’s half-way 
house has therefore been definitely abandoned. 

I come now to the relation of light as experienced to light 
in physics. Here the cleavage is older than in the case of 
space and time; indeed, it is already admitted in Locke's 
theory. It is impossible to exaggerate the importance of this 
cleavage in separating the world of physics from the world of 
common sense. With the exception of parts of our own body 
and bodies with which our own body is in contact, the objects 
which, according to common sense, we perceive, are known 



THE ABSTRACTNESS OF PHYSICS 133 

by means of light, sound, or odour. The last of these, though 
important to many species of animals, is relatively subordinate 
in the perceptions of human beings. Sound is less important 
than light, and in any case raises exactly the same problems 
in the present connection. We may therefore concentrate 
upon light as a source of our knowledge concerning the external 
world. 

When we “ see ” an object, we seem to have immediate 
knowledge of something external to our own body. But 
physics says that a comphcated process starts from the external 
object, travels across the intervening region, and at last 
reaches the eye. What goes on between the eye and the brain 
is a question for the physiologists, and what finally happens 
when we " see ” is a question for the psychologist. But 
without troubling ourselves about what happens after the light 
reaches the eye, it is evident that what the physicist has to say 
is destructive of the common-sense notion of " seeing.” It 
makes no difference, in this matter, which of the possible 
theories we adopt as to the physical character of light, since all 
equally make it something utterly different from what we see. 
The data of sight, analyzed as much as possible, resolve them- 
selves into coloured shapes. But the physical analogue of a 
colour is a periodic process of a certain frequency relative to 
the eye of the observer. The physical world, it seems natural 
to infer, is destitute of colour. Moreover, the correspondence 
between colours and their physical counterparts is peculiar: 
colours are qualities, which are static while they last, whereas 
their coimterparts are periodic processes, which are in the 
medium between the eye and the object which we say we 
“ see.” What happens in the object itself, if it shines by its 
own light, is the sort of thing considered in Bohr’s theory : a 
sudden jump of an electron from one orbit to another. This 
is very unlike a sensation of (say) red. And what looks to the 
eye like a continuous red smrface is supposed to be really a 



134 the abstractness OF PHYSICS 

volume whose apparent colour is due to the fact that some of 
the electrons in it are jumping in a certain way. When we 
say they are “ jumping,” we are saying something too pictorial. 
What we mean is that they possess an unknown quality called 
" energy,” which is a known function of a certain number of 
small integers, and that one or more of these integers have 
suddenly changed their values. It may be claimed as a merit in 
such theories as Professor Lewis’s, considered in the preceding 
chapter, that it makes the connection between this process 
and the eye rather less indirect than it appears on the tm- 
dulatory theory. But even then the sort of sudden transition 
contemplated by Bohr is very unhke the perception of a red 
patch: it is prima facie quite dissimilar in structure, and 
unknown as regards its intrinsic properties. 

1 come now to the most serious of our questions; How is 
matter to be understood in modem physics ? Educated 
common sense regards matter as the cause of sensations; 
broadly speaking, sensations private to one person are caused 
by the matter of that person’s body — e.g. headaches and 
toothaches — ^while sensations common to several, or of a sort 
which is common to several in suitable circumstances, are 
attributed to causes external to the bodies of the persons ex- 
periencing the sensations. (I am not at present attempting 
to make these statements exact, but merely to interpret what 
common sense would reply if questioned.) We recognize the 
" same ” piece of matter on different occasions by similarity 
in its qualities, though we admit that this is a rough-and-ready 
test which may lead us astray. We think, however, that, if 
we had observed closely and continuously, we could have 
distinguished between two similar objects by means of con- 
tinuity in their perceived spatial relations. The three-card 
trick illustrates what I mean : if we watch the performer care- 
fully, we can tell which is the card we saw a moment ago, by 
means of the spatio-temporal continuity of its positions. What 



THE ABSTRACTNESS OF PHYSICS 


'35 


common sense assumes may be expressed, in language foreign 
to common sense, by saying : A piece of matter is manifested by 
sensible qualities whose variations are continuous, and whose 
sensible spatial relations to other such continuous series of 
qualities are continuous functions of the time. In practice, 
the changes of sensible quality are often so slow as to be 
negligible, and this greatly facilitates the task of common sense 
in recognizing the " same ” object on two different occasions. 

On the common-sense level, there are difficulties in certain 
cases : a drop, in a sensibly homogeneous fluid in which there is 
a ciurent, cannot be distinguished at a later moment from 
another drop which was near it at the earlier moment. Com- 
bustion also offers difficulties to common sense. Both these 
matters can, however, be dealt with on a common-sense basis. 
A small solid object floating in the water will show which way 
the water is moving, and the smoke shows, more or less, what 
happens to an object which is burned. The elaboration im- 
mediately suggested leads on naturally to elementary physics 
and chemistry, where it is still assumed, at least tacitly, that 
the objects concerned are of the same sort as sensible objects, 
but rather smaller. Often they can actually be seen under 
the microscope. Imaginatively, we continue to attribute this 
continuity with sensible objects to our scientific objects, our 
electrons and protons, thus concealing from ourselves the 
highly abstract character of our assertions. At moments, we 
realize this abstractness; but it does not make its due impres- 
sion, because imagination reasserts itself as soon as we are 
off our guard. 

In theoretical physics, what is an electron, and how do we 
decide whether two events belong to the history of the same 
electron ? I am not asking how we decide in practice, but 
what is our theoretical definition. Ever since Minkowski, 
people have spoken of “ world-lines,” which are in fact the 
series of events constituting the history of one unit of matter . 



136 THE ABSTRACTNESS OF PHYSICS 

but they have not always been as explicit as one could wish 
in telling us the criterion by which, in theory, it is decided that 
two events belong to one world-line. The test of identity 
between the parts of a world-line must obviously depend upon 
the laws of physics. These laws say that a material imit will 
move in such-and-such a way; inverting this statement, they 
say that what has moved in such-and-such a way is to count 
as one unit of matter. This is substantially the method pur- 
sued by Eddington. In Chapter IX. we considered the tensor 


which, as Eddington shows (§ 52), has the property of con- 
servation — i.e. if the amoimt of it in any closed region varies, 
it does so by a flux across the boimdaries. He identifies this 
quantity with matter, because of its property of conservation : 
" The quantity - Jg'G appearing in our theory is, on accoimt 
of its property of conservation, now identified with matter, or 
rather with the mechanical abstraction of matter which com- 
prises the measurable properties of mass, momentum and 
stress sufficing for all mechanical phenomena " (p. 146). And 
the above quantity, it will be remembered, is defined solely 
by means of the formula for small intervals. It will be 
admitted that matter, so defined, has become rather different 
from the matter in which common sense believes. If Dr 
Johnson had known Eddington’s definition of matter, he might 
have been less satisfied with his practical refutation of 
Berkeley. 

The exact form of Eddington’s definition is not important 
for our present purposes; indeed, he himself somewhat 
generalizes it in a later passage. 'The point is that it is the 
sort of definition to which modem physics is bound to be led. 
Approximately, matter as conceived by common sense is con- 
served; wherever it appears to be destroyed or created, we 
can find ways of explaining away this appearance. Hence, as 



THE ABSTRACTNESS OF PHYSICS 


137 


£in ideal suggested by empirical facts, we adopt the view that 
matter is indestructible. We then turn round, and beginning 
from the formula for interval we construct a mathematical 
quantity which is indestructible. This, we say, we shall call 
" matter and no harm comes of our doing so. But when- 
ever we take a step of this sort, we widen the gulf between 
mathematical physics and observation, and increase the 
problem of building a bridge between them. This problem 
has not been taken as seriously by physicists as it deserves to 
be taken. The reason is partly that it has arisen gradually. 
Physics and perception are like two people on opposite sides 
of a brook which slowly widens as they walk : at first it is easy 
to jump across, but imperceptibly it grows more difficult, and 
at last a vast labour is required to get from one side to the 
other. Another reason is that physiology and psychology, 
the two sciences concerned with perception, are less advanced 
than physics. The man accustomed to the beauty and 
exactitude of physics is liable to feel a kind of intellectual 
nausea when he finds himself among the uncertain and vague 
speculations of the less scientific sciences. He cannot be 
expected to admit that these sciences have a part to play in 
providing the premisses for his own precise mathematical 
deductions. Perhaps he is right, but prima facie physics, as 
an empirical study, derives its facts from perception, and 
cannot remain indifferent to any argmnent which throws 
doubt on the validity of perception, least of all when that 
argument is derived from physics itself. An argument de- 
signed to prove that a proposition is false is not invalidated by 
having that proposition among its premisses. Hence t/modem 
physics invalidates perception as a source of knowledge about 
the external world, and yet depends upon perception, that is 
a valid argument against modem physics. I do not say that 
physics in fact has this defect, but I do say that a considerable 
labour of interpretation is necessary in order to show that it 



THE ABSTRACTNESS OF PHYSICS 


can be absolved in this respect. And it is because of the 
abstractness of physics, as developed by mathematicians, that 
this labour is required. 

The inevitable specialism which is forced upon men of 
science by the very increase of scientific knowledge has had a 
good deal to do with obscuring this problem. Few men have 
been both physicists and physiologists. Helmholtz’s re- 
searches concerning vision are a notable example of the com- 
bination of these studies, but there are not many others. 
Physiologists and psychologists are seldom well-informed in 
physics, and are apt to assume an old-fashioned physics which 
makes their problems look easier than they are. Moreover, 
even when the problem is realized, a man may not possess a 
mastery of the proper instrument for its solution — namely, 
mathematical logic. It is by means of mathematical logic 
that Dr Whitehead has been enabled to make his immense 
contribution to our problem. But, greatly as I admire his 
work, which I place far above anything else that has been 
written on the relation of abstract physics to the sensible 
world, I think there are points — ^and not xmimportant points — 
where his methods break down for want of due attention to 
psychology and physiology. Moreover, there seem to be 
premisses in his construction which are derived rather from a 
metaphysic than from the actual needs of the problem. For 
these reasons, I venture to think that it is possible to obtain 
a solution less revolutionary than his, and somewhat simpler 
from a logical point of view. The solution, however, must 
wait until we have examined perception as a source of know- 
ledge, which will be our topic in Part II. The metaphysic 
which reconciles the results of Part II. with the abstract 
physics which we have been considering in Part I. will be the 
subject of Part III. 



PART II 

PHYSICS AND PERCEPTION 




CHAPTER XV 

FROM PRIMITIVE PERCEPTION TO COMMON SENSE 
In this Part, the subject with which we are concerned is the 
evidence for the truth of physics — ^not of this or that special 
result in physics, but of the general structure of the science. 
It is to be expected that the evidence will not be such as to 
give certainty, but at best such as to give probability; it is to 
be expected, also, that this probability may be increased by 
a suitable interpretation of physics, where " interpretation ” 
is understood in the sense considered in Chapter I. We shall 
find it desirable to divide our problem into several parts, each 
of which will have an importance not confined to physics. 
There is need, first, to be clear as to what we mean by an 
empirical science, and what is the degree of certainty to be 
expected of it at the best. There is need to discuss what can 
be meant by " data,” and to distinguish inferences, theories 
and hypotheses. We shall then discuss the causal theory of 
perception, and at the same time the philosophy called 
“ phenomenalism.” From these topics we shall pass to 
general discussion, first of cause, then of substance. This will 
lead us to the epistemological grounds for interpreting physics 
in accordance with neutral monism, and to the paramoimt 
importance of structure in scientific inference. We shall 
conclude with a definition of perception considered as affording 
the empirical data for physics, and with the consideration of 
phenomena analogous to perception in the non-mental world. 
But first of all it will be well to examine the historical develop- 
ment by means of which our problem has assumed its present 
form — ^both the prescientific development leading to common 
sense, and the scientific development leading from common 
sense to physics. 

141 



142 FROM PRIMITIVE PERCEPTION TO COMMON SENSE 

Conunon sense consists of a set of beliefs, or at least habits, 
which work well in practice except in situations which rarely 
occur. A savage may be puzzled by a box containing an 
unseen gyroscope, or by rails carrying an electric current; 
common sense has not prepared him for oddities of this sort. 
But a little familiarity enables a man to fit them into his 
common-sense world, and a mechanic soon learns their ways if 
he has occasion to do so. This illustrates the fact that there 
is no sharp line between science and common sense: both 
involve expectations, but those resulting from science are more 
accurate. It is possible to pursue science practically without 
any fimdamental change from the metaphysic of common 
sense. But when theoretical science is taken seriously, it is 
found to involve a quite changed metaphysic, whose relation 
to that of common sense demands investigation. This wiD 
form the topic of the next chapter; in the present chapter, I 
shall consider the genesis of common sense, not in the race, 
since that is undiscoverable, but in the individual. 

In studying infants, as in studying animals, we are com- 
pelled to confine ourselves to behaviouristic methods, whatever 
oxir views may be on the subject of behaviourism as a general 
principle in psychology. We can observe the bodily acts of 
young infants, but they cannot tell us their thoughts. At 
a low mental level, however, it is hardly profitable to dis- 
tinguish between a belief and a habit of action. Beliefs, in the 
psychological sense, seem to emerge out of previously existing 
habits, and to be, at first, little more than verbal representa- 
tions of habits formed before words could be uttered. There 
is therefore no great loss in being confined to behaviouristic 
methods when we are considering infants before the age at 
which they can speak. 

It is of course obvious and generally recognized that very 
yotmg infants do not possess the common-sense notion of an 
" object.” This is by no means obvious with the young of 



FROM PRIMITIVE PERCEPTION TO COMMON SENSE 143 

some other kinds of animals — ^with chickens, for example. 
They possess, as instincts, useful ways of behaviour which in 
the human young are only learnt by experience; for example, 
they can pick up a grain which they see on the ground. The 
hiunan infant has no such innate skill; for several months, it 
makes no attempt to touch what it sees. The " hand-eye 
co-ordination ” comes as a result of experience. Some native 
aptitudes, of course, a new-born child does possess; for 
example, it can turn its eyes towards a bright light, though 
not very quickly or accurately. It has a reflex connected 
with sucking, but not a very intelligent one; indeed, it hardly 
amounts to more than the practice of trying to suck anything 
that comes in contact with the lips. Even in this respect, the 
human infant is inferior to the yoimg of other mammals. We 
can say that certain stimuli rouse certain reflexes, but these 
are only just sufficient to keep the infant alive with the help 
of maternal care. 

In this primitive condition, the infant obviously has no 
conception of an “ object.” An ” object,” for common sense, 
is something having a certain degree of permanence, and con- 
nected with several kinds of sensation. This involves some- 
thing like memory, to give rise to the idea of permanence, or 
rather, at first, to the feeling of recognition; and it involves 
experience, to give to one sensory stimulus a reaction originally 
associated with another. In infants, the most important factor 
in forming the common-sense notion of an object is the hand- 
eye co-ordination, the discovery that it is possible, often, to 
grasp what is seen. In this way, visual and tactual spaces 
become correlated, which is one of the most important steps 
in the mental growth of an infant. 

At this point, it is important to be clear as to the difference 
between " space ” in psychology and “ space ” in physics. 
There is undoubtedly a connection between the two, which it 
will be part of our business to make clear at a later stage. But 



144 from primitive PERCEPTION TO COMMON SENSE 


the connection is very round-about and inferential. At the 
outset, it is much more useful to realize the difference between 
them than the connection, since much confusion of thought 
arises from supposing the cormection to be closer than it is. 
In physics there is only one space, while in psychology there 
are several for each individual; these can, it is true, be reduced 
by manipulation to one for each individual, but they cannot 
be reduced further without introducing obscurities that it is 
impossible to dissipate. The space containing my visual 
objects has no point in common with the space containing 
yours, since no visual object in my world is precisely identical 
with one in yours. And the amalgamation of the spaces of 
my different senses into one space is a piece of early science, 
performed by the infant at about the age of three months. 
Dr Whitehead, who is anxious to bridge the gulf between 
perception and physics, seems to me to make his task too easy 
where space is concerned. For example, he says :* 

" The current doctrine of different kinds of space — tactual 
space, visual space, and so on — arises entirely from the error 
of deducing space from the relations between figures. With 
such a procedure, since there are different types of figures for 
different types of sense, evidently there must be different types 
of space for different types of sense. And the demand created 
the supply. If, however, the modem assimilation of space and 
time is to hold, we must go further and admit different kinds of 
time for different kinds of sense — ^namely, a tactual time, a visual 
time, and so on. If this be allowed, it is difficult to understand 
how the disjecta membra of our perceptual experience manage 
to collect themselves into a common world. For example, it 
would require a pre-established harmony to secure that the 
visual newspaper was delivered at the visual time of the visual 
breakfast in the visual room, and also the tactual newspaper 
was delivered at the tactual time of the tactual breakfast in the 
tactual room . It is difficult enough for the plain man — such as 
the present author — to accept the miracle of getting the two 
* The Principles of Natural Knowledge, pp. 193-4. 



FROM PRIMITIVE PERCEPTION TO COMMON SENSE 145 

newspapers into the two rooms daily with such admirable 
exactitude at the same time. But the additional miracle 
introduced by the two times is really incredible.” 

This passage is so pleasant that I hate to criticize it. But 
I do not know how else to make clear where I differ from Dr 
Whitehead. There is first a purely verbal question to be 
cleared up. Dr Whitehead says it is an error to deduce space 
from the relations between figures. It is certainly an error 
to deduce physical space in this way, but with psychological 
space the matter is different. There certainly are perceived 
relations between figures, and these perceived relations are 
part of our perceptual data in physics. Whether they are 
to be said to constitute a space or not, is a verbal question. 
Psychologists, as a rule, find it convenient to say so; but the 
matter is unimportant. When this question has been cleared 
away, however, there remain others which are vital to an 
understanding of the relation between physics and perception. 

Take, first, the question of the two times. As will appear 
when we come to the causal theory of perception, the whole of 
my perceptual world is, from the standpoint of physics, in my 
head; any two events which I experience together overlap 
in physical space, and all of them together, in physical space, 
occupy a volume smaller than my head, since it certainly does 
not include the hair, skull, teeth, etc. Consequently, on 
relativity principles, there is no question of two times, since 
this only arises for events which are spatially separated in 
physical space. 

As for the necessity of distinguishing tactual and visual 
space: there are perceived relations between objects seen 
simultaneously, and also between objects touched simul- 
taneously, and these relations are part of the crude material 
out of which we construct our notion of space. These relations 
cannot hold between a visual and a tactual percept. But 
there are other relations which do hold — ^namely, those of corre- 



146 FROM PRIMITIVE PERCEPTION TO COMMON SENSE 

lation: when I see my hand in contact with a visual object 
I feel it in contact with a tactual object, and moreover the 
visual and the tactual object have certain relations to each 
other — e.g. where we see a comer we get a tactual sensation 
of sharpness. All this, however, is leamt by experience ; that 
is to say, we leam the laws of the correlation by experience. 
The infant can be seen learning them. One may call these 
laws “ pre-established harmonies," but they are no more so 
than any other scientific laws. Unless we are going to say 
that all laws of nature must be demonstrable by pure logic, 
which is hardly conceivable nowadays, we must admit that 
there are co-existences and sequences which we expect on a basis 
of past experience, in spite of the fact that their failure would 
not be logically impossible. And the correlation of visual and 
tactual sensations is a case of this sort. 

It is sometimes suggested, in such cases, that the correlated 
occurrences are merely different manifestations of one and 
the same entity. This is, in fact, the view of common sense, 
which holds that it can both see and touch the same object. 
I have no objection whatever to this way of spoaking, and I 
do not deny that, rightly interpreted, it may express a correct 
view. But it remains nevertheless true that the entity said to 
be manifested is inferred from exp)erience of a correlation, and 
that the piercepts correlated are not logically interconnected, 
but only empirically. We have v, a visual percept, and at the 
same time t, a tactual percept. Each rouses appropriate 
reflexes, and, owing to their frequently occurring together, it 
happens in time that each rouses also the reflexes appropriate 
to the other. This practical induction occurs before the child 
has reflected that the two are correlated; indeed, unless he 
becomes a learned man he probably never realizes the correla- 
tion of V and t. But as soon as we reflect upon the matter 
we can see that there is no necessary correlation. It fails with 
blind men, and with men whose fingers have been anaesthetize d. 



FROM PRIMITIVE PERCEPTION TO COMMON SENSE 147 


In general, however, the correlation holds good. Common 
sense explains it by regarding both touch and sight as ways 
of getting to know an object which is at once tangible and 
visible. In the language of the causal theory of perception, 
we say that v and t have a common cause, in general external 
to the body. I do not wish to deny this, but only to point 
out that, when we are considering the grounds of our know- 
ledge, we cannot say that we know of the correlation because 
we know of the common external cause. The order in know- 
ledge is the opposite : we have evidence for the correlation in 
our experience, and we infer* the common cause from the 
correlation, so that the common cause cannot have more 
certainty than the correlation, which is its premiss. From a 
behaviouristic point of view, the infant ” knows ” the corre- 
lation when either stimulus calls out the response originally 
appropriate to the other. 

We must here guard against a small possible misunder- 
standing. If V and t are invariably correlated, it may be said, 
it is impossible that one should occur without the other, and 
therefore there can be no means of judging whether one alone 
would elicit the response belonging to the other. In fact, the 
matter is not quite so simple as we have been taking it to be. 
What we learn by infantile experience is not that v and t are 
always correlated ; it is possible to touch in the dark, or with 
the eyes shut, and it is possible to see without touching. What 
we learn is that the correlation can be brought about easily in 
many cases. Movements of the eye will usually give a visual 
sensation corresponding to a previously rmcorrelated tactual 
sensation, and movements of the hand (or other part of the 
body) will, in a certain proportion of cases, give a tactual 
sensation corresponding to a previously uncorrelated visual 
sensation. Children practising the hand-eye co-ordination 
attempt to grasp objects not within their reach; it is only 
* I am here using the word " infer " in a behaviouristic sense. 



148 FROM PRIMITIVE PERCEPTION TO COMMON SENSE 

gradually that distance comes to be judged more or less 
correctly. When objects are not within our grasp, a new 
correlation comes into play— namely, between the visual 
sensation and the journey required to bring the object within 
our reach. Unfamiliar circumstances will cause even adults 
to make mistakes — for example, that of imderestimating the 
depth of objects imder water. Great distances remain per- 
manently beyond the scope of common sense : only science can 
assure us that the sun is farther off than the moon. 

What we can observe the infant learning is the bodily acts 
which will, in fact, reinforce a percept of one sense by a percept 
of another ; more particularly he learns to touch what he sees — 
i.e. to procure for himself a correlated pair v, t, instead of 
the isolated v. Similarly he learns to look round when he hears 
a voice, and so on. All this implies that he has, so far as action is 
concerned, the notion of a physical object, as something capable 
of affecting several senses simultaneously. The element of 
recognition is logically separable, and arises somewhat earlier. 

These motor habits are essential in generating common- 
sense beliefs, which arise at a much later stage of mental 
growth. Common sense, in its more primitive form, is hardly 
aware that there is such an occurrence as perceiving ; it is only 
aware of the perceived object. And by the time that even 
the most rudimentary reflection begins, each sense calls out 
responses connected with other senses, so that even when, 
from the standpoint of external stimulus, only one sense is 
affected, the experience has the massiveness of something in 
which several senses are involved. See, for example, the 
pictures in Kohler’s Mentality of Apes : here we see chimpanzees 
which are watching others with S5nnpathetic movements of 
the arms that indicate stimulation of bodily feelings con- 
nected with balance, although the sole stimulus is visual. 
This accovmts for the fact that common sense can so con- 
fidently identify an object touched and not seen with an 



FROM PRIMITIVE PERCEPTION TO COMMON SENSE 149 

object seen but not touched-^.g. the cricket-ball now success- 
fully caught and the same ball as it flew through the air. The 
reason is that the experience is always richer than the sensory 
stimulus alone would warrant: it contains always responses 
arising from physiological experience of past correlations. If 
an adult were to hear a donkey’s bray for the first time, without 
having previously known that there was an animal which made 
that noise, his experience would be amazingly unlike that of 
a normal adult in the same circumstances. 

Common sense does not initially distinguish as sharply as 
civilized nations do between persons, animals, and things. 
Primitive religion affords abundant evidence of this. A thing, 
like an animal, has a sort of power residing within it : it may 
fall on your head, roll over in the wind, and so on. It is only 
gradually that inanimate objects become sharply separated 
from people, through the observation that their actions have 
no purpose. But animals are not separable from people on 
this groimd, and are in fact thought by savages to be much 
more intelligent than they are. 

Common sense is, in most respects, naively realistic: it 
believes that, as a rule, our perceptions show us objects as they 
really are. It is able to hold this view because of the mass of 
experience which, in each individual, precedes the common- 
sense outlook. We do not think a distant person smellier than 
a person near at heind; we do not judge circular objects seen 
sideways to be elliptic; eind so on. All this is, for common 
sense, part of the perception; it may be doubted whether it is 
not so also for psychology. But it is certainly not part of 
the infant’s initial perceptive apparatus: it is something which 
the infant has to learn. Some of it is learnt after the begin- 
nings of speech have been acquired— particularly a right 
judgment as to the size of distant objects. But at any rate 
by the time a child is three years old he has acquired the 
common-sense outlook. That is to say, his immediate reaction 



150 FROM PRIMITIVE PERCEPTION TO COMMON SENSE 


to a sensory stimulus involves a great deal of previous ex- 
perience, and is such as to enable him to arrive, without any 
mental process, at a far more objective view of what he per- 
ceives than was possible at birth. I mean hereby "objective” 
not anything metaphysical, but merely " agreeing with the 
testimony of others.” It would be a complete mistake to sup- 
pose that, in an adult, there is first an experience correspond- 
ing to the bare sensory stimulus, and then an inference to 
that of which it is a sign. This may occur in certain cases, for 
example, if we watch a man drawing a face in an apparently 
haphazard manner, and do not realize till the last moment that 
a face is being intended. But such an experience is quite 
unlike normal perception, where the " inference,” in the only 
sense in which it can be said to exist, is physiological, or at 
any rate not discoverable by introspection. It is because the 
sensory stimulus is able to lead us, without any mental inter- 
mediary, to an object practically identical with that perceived 
by others in our neighbourhood, that we are able to adopt the 
common-sense belief that we actually perceive external 
objects. 

The notion of cause is part of the apparatus of common sense. 
I do not think it would be true to say that common sense re- 
gards objects as the causes of our perceptions ; it would not, 
unless challenged, think of bringing in causation in this con- 
nection. It looks for causes when it is surprised, not when an 
occurrence seems perfectly natural. It demands causes for a 
mirage, a reflexion, a dream, an earthquake, a plague, and so 
on, but not for the ordinary course of nature. And the cause 
which it looks for, wherever the event concerned has great 
emotional interest, is pretty sure to be animistic: the anger of 
the gods, or something analogous. The idea of universal 
causation, and of causation divorced from purpose, belongs 
to a later stage of mental development, and marks the begin- 
nings of philosophy and science. 



FROM PRIMITIVE PERCEPTION TO COMMON SENSE 151 


Substance is a category which comes naturally to common 
sense, though without the attribute of indestructibility added 
by the metaphysicians — ^but as to this perhaps diverse opinions 
are possible. One would be inclined to suppose that common 
sense regards fire as destroying what it biums; but the Chinese, 
when they had made a solemn covenant, used to bum it, in 
order that the gods might taJce cognizance of it through the 
smoke. (A copy was kept for terrestrial purposes.) And 
races that practise cremation do not, as a rule, suppose that 
they are totally destro3dng the body. On the other hand, 
there has existed a rehgious prejudice against cremation which 
imphed the belief that the body was thereby totally annihi- 
lated. I think one must conclude, therefore, that the attitude 
of common sense as to the indestructibility of substance is 
vacillating; on the whole, the success of physics in providing 
immortal material units represents a triumph of the philo- 
sopher over the plain man. 

Substance, whether indestructible or not, is of great im- 
portance in primitive thought, and dominates syntax, through 
which it has dominated philosophy down to our own day. 
At a primitive stage, there is no distinction between " sub- 
stance ” and “thing”; both express, first in language and 
then in thought, the emotion of recognition. To an infant, 
recognition is a very strong emotion, particularly when con- 
nected with something agreeable or disagreeable. When the 
infant begins to use words, it applies the same word to percepts 
on two occasions, if the second rouses the emotion of recogni- 
tion associated with memory of the first, or perhaps merely 
with the word which was learnt in presence of the first. (When 
I say that the infant uses the “ same ’’ word, I mean that he 
makes closely similar noises.) Using a given word as a 
response to stimuli of a certain kind is a motor habit, like 
reaching for the bottle. Two percepts to which the same word 
applies are thought to be identical, unless both can be present 



152 FROM PRIMITIVE PERCEPTION TO COMMON SENSE 

at once; this characteristic distinguishes general names from 
proper names. The basis of this whole process is the emotion 
of recognition. When the process, as a learning of motor 
habits, is complete, and reflection upon it begins, identity of 
name is taken to indicate identity of substance — in one sense 
in the case of proper names, in another sense in the case of 
names applicable to two or more simultaneous percepts — 
i.e. general names (Platonic ideas, universals). Throughout, 
language comes first and thought follows in its footsteps. 
And language is governed largely by physiological causation. 

A substance or thing is supposed to be identical at difierent 
times, although its properties may change. John Jones is 
the same person throughout his life, although he grows from 
childhood to manhood, is sometimes pleased and sometimes 
cross, sometimes awake and sometimes asleep. Primarily, he 
is considered to be the same person because he has the same 
name. But the name, like the person, is not exactly the same 
on different occasions; it may be spoken loud or soft, quickly 
or slowly. These differences, however, are too slight to prevent 
recognition, except on rare occasions — e.g. when the name is 
pronounced very badly by a foreigner; one of the merits of 
names is that they change less than the person named. 

The conception of substantial identity with varying pro- 
perties is embedded in language, in common sense, and in 
metaphysics. To my mind, it is useful in practice, but harmful 
in theory. It is harmful, I mean, if taken as metaphysically 
ultimate : what appears as one substance with changing states 
should, I maintain, be conceived as a series of occurrences 
linked together in some important way. I will not yet argue 
this view. It would have been utterly foreign to physics imtil 
the substitution of space-time for space and time, with the 
corresponding substitution of a four-dimensional continuum 
of events for the older conception of persistent material units 
moving in a three-dimensional space. But the older con- 



FROM PRIMITIVE PERCEPTION TO COMMON SENSE 153 


ception still appears the natural one to apply to electrons 
and protons, so that physics may be said to have, at the 
moment, two different points of view on this issue. For the 
present, I am not concerned to criticize the notion of substance, 
but only to show its genesis, which I take to be derived from 
the pre-human emotion which we reflectively call “recogni- 
tion,” though it has not, originally, the definite cognitive 
character attached to the word when applied to the mental 
processes of £m adult human being. 

Induction, like substance, plays a large part in common 
sense, and has a basis which is primarily physiological. I am 
not at present discussing the validity of induction, but the 
cause of the practice of induction among animals, children, 
and savages. Of course the validity of induction is really 
assumed in such a discussion, since, without it, causes cannot 
be discovered. But we do not assume the validity of the 
primitive inductions which we are discussing ; we assume only 
that there is some valid form of induction. Throughout 
genetic psychology we assume the validity of ordinary scientific 
procedure. If this assumption were to lead us to views on 
genetic psychology which threw doubt on the vahdity of 
scientific procedure, that would constitute a reducHo ad ab- 
surdum, which would destroy genetic psychology along with 
the rest. Therefore, whenever some obviously invalid process 
is said to be the psychological somce of a method essential to 
science, we must suppose, imless we are to embrace complete 
scepticism, that there is some valid process which, in most 
of the cases to which the invalid process is applied by im- 
scientific people, gives rather similar results. All this has 
perhaps only a pragmatic justification, but whether this is 
the case cannot be decided ab initio. The real utihty of 
investigating crude primitive forms of inference is that the 
contrast between them and ciurent scientific inference may 
suggest directions in which the latter is capable of still further 



154 from primitive PERCEPTION TO COMMON SENSE 


improvement. The direct logical importance of investiga- 
tions into the origins of our mental processes is nil, but the 
importance as a means of stimulating imagination in the 
formation of hypotheses may be considerable. It is for this 
reason that the topics of the present chapter form a useful 
introduction to those which form our proper subject- 
matter. 

The source of induction, speaking historically, is the general 
law of what Dr J. B. Watson calls " learned reactions.” In its 
schematic simplicity, this law is as follows: If a stimulus S 
to a living body of an animal produces a reaction R, and a 
stimulus S' produces a reaction R', then if S and S' are applied 
together, there is a tendency for S alone, afterwards, to produce 
R' as well as R. E.g. if you expose a person frequently to a 
certain loud noise and a bright light simultaneously, after 
a while the loud noise alone will cause his pupils to contract. 
It is obvious that the practice of induction is simply the 
application of this law to cognitive reactions. If you have 
frequently heard the words " there’s Jones ” when you could 
see Jones, these words will in the end cause you to believe 
that Jones is present even if, for the moment, you do not see 
him. This form of induction is involved in understanding 
speech. It is obvious that, in its cruder forms, induction may 
give rise to false beliefs as well as to true ones; scientific 
methodology has to seek a form of induction which shall make 
false inferences much rarer than true ones. If such a form 
can be found, a man may train himself, in his professional 
activity, to abstain from the more primitive forms. But as 
an ordinary mortal he could not survive for a day if he refused 
to trust to what we may call physiological induction, which 
stores up in the body the lessons of past experience. In 
practice, a nearly instantaneous method of inference which is 
right nine times out of ten is preferable to a slow method which 
is always right. A man who subjected all his food to chemical 



FROM PRIMITIVE PERCEPTION TO COMMON SENSE 155 


analysis before eating it would avoid being poisoned, but 
would also fail to be adequately nourished. 

Throughout the development of theory, great intellectual 
changes have been repeatedly necessitated by errors which 
were very small from the standpoint of practice. The theory 
of relativity is a remarkable instance of this: an immense 
reconstruction has been made to meet discrepancies which 
could only be detected by the most delicate measurements. 
The further science advances, the more minute become the 
facts which it cannot yet assimilate. Common sense does well 
enough for most of the needs of a pre-industrial community, 
but not for the construction of a dynamo or a wireless station. 
For these, we have to advance to the standpoint of pre- 
relativity physics. Machines involving relativity physics do 
not yet exist, but presumably they will some day. This, 
however, is beside the point. The point is, that a small dis- 
crepancy between theory and observation may indicate a 
large error in theory. Take, e.g., naive realism and the velocity 
of light, the latter from a pre-relativity point of view. The 
supposition of common sense and naive realism, that we see 
the actual physical object, is very hard to reconcile with the 
scientific view that our perception occurs somewhat later than 
the emission of light by the object ; and this difficulty is not 
overcome by the fact that the time involved, hke the notorious 
baby, is a very little one. We cannot therefore argue from 
the practical success of common sense to its approximate 
theoretical accuracy, but only to a certain rough correspondence 
between its commoner inferences and those permitted by a 
correct theory. If physics has had to desert common sense, 
that is no reason for finding fault with physics. 



CHAPTER XVI 

FROM COMMON SENSE TO PHYSICS 
It was in the seventeenth century that the scientific outlook, 
as opposed to that of common sense, first became important. 
It had existed in individuals among the Greeks, but it had 
not been able to point to sufficiently great achievements to 
impress the general educated public. It was in the seventeenth 
century that science began to win spectacular victories, and 
to develop an outlook definitely different, in certain important 
respects, from that of common sense. The historical aspects 
of this change have been set forth by Dr Whitehead in his 
Science and the Modern World, particularly in the chapter on 
" The Century of Genius,” so admirably that it would be 
foolish to attempt to cover the ground again. I shall therefore 
select only certain topics which are important in relation to 
subsequent chapters. 

The chief thing that happened in the seventeenth century, 
from our point of view, was the divorce between perception 
and matter, which occupied all the philosophers from Descartes 
to Berkeley, leading the latter to deny matter, while it had, in 
effect, led Leibniz to deny perception. 

Common sense believes that there is interaction between 
mind and matter ; when a stone hits us our mind feels pain, 
and when we will to throw a stone it moves. The development 
of physics made matter seem causally self-contained: it ap- 
peared that there were always physical causes for the move- 
ments of matter, so that volitions must be otiose. Descartes, 
believing in the conservation of vis viva, but ignorant of the 
conservation of momentum, thought that the mind could 
influence the direction of the motion of the animal spirits, but 
156 



FROM COMMON SENSE TO PHYSICS 


157 


not its amount. This half-way house had to be abandoned 
by his followers, owing to the discovery of the conservation of 
momentum. They therefore decided that mind can never 
influence matter. They also decided that matter can never 
influence mind. This latter view was not based directly upon 
science, but upon the metaphysic which had been invented 
to explain away the apparent influences of mind on matter. 
To suppose that the movement of my arm is not caused by my 
volition is to suppose something very odd; it is no odder to 
suppose that the perception of my arm is not caused by my 
arm. The view that there were two substances, mind and 
matter, and that neither could act upon the other, explained 
the causal independence of the physical world, and entailed that 
of the mental world. Thus mind and matter became very 
widely separated — much more so than they had been before 
the rise of modem physics. 

All modem philosophy before Kant is dominated by this 
problem , for which a variety of solutions were offered. Spinoza 
held that there was only one substance, whose only known 
attributes were thought and extension, which ran parallel 
without interaction, like the two perfect clocks of the oc- 
casionalists. Leibniz believed in an immense number of 
substances, all causally independent of each other, but all 
running parallel in virtue of a pre-established harmony ; these 
substances were all minds, more or less developed, and matter 
was only a confused way of " perceiving ” a number of sub- 
stances. The word “ perceiving ’’ has, in Leibniz’s philosophy, 
a peculiar meaning, derived from parallelism and from the 
notion of " mirroring the universe.” Without attempting to 
adhere closely to Leibniz's own words, we may set forth the 
view which is implied in his system, whether he held it in its 
entirety or not, as follows: Each monad, at each moment, 
is in an infinitely complex state, which is capable of a one-one 
correspondence with the state of each other monad at that 



158 FROM COMMON SENSE TO PHYSICS 

moment. (This is the pre-established harmony.) The 
differences between the states of different monads are like the 
differences between the aspects of a given object from different 
places, and are compared by Leibniz to differences of per- 
spective or point of view. These differences are capable of 
arrangement in a three-dimensional order, so that the monads 
form a pattern which changes with the time. In addition to 
the one-one correspondences between the monads, there is 
a one-one correspondence between the state of each monad 
and the pattern formed by all the monads (mirroring the 
world). It will be seen that the latter logically implies the 
former: if each monad always mirrors the world, each is 
always in harmony with every other. Let us take a mathe- 
matical analogy: suppose the states of the m* monad at a 
given moment are represented by the numbers : 

m-i, w-i/2, m-i/z, ... 

then there is a one-one correspondence between these states 
and those of the n** monad, which are : 

« - I, n - 1/2, n - 1/3, . , . 

and there is also a one-one correspondence between the states 
of each monad and the series: 

I, 2, 3, . . . w, . . . n, . . . 

which may be taken to be the series of monads. Substitute 
three continuous co-ordinates for one discrete co-ordinate, and 
we get a mathematical representation of Leibniz’s world. 

The obvious difficulty in this system was that no con- 
ceivable reason could be given for supposing that a monad 
mirrored the world. Leibniz himself was one monad, and, on 
his own theory, would have had exactly the same life if he 
had been the only monad, since the monads were " window- 
less." He could not therefore give any grounds against 
solipsism except some rather far-fetched arguments derived 



FROM COMMON SENSE TO PHYSICS 159 

from theology and God’s " metaphysical perfection.” This 
defect was due to his theory of causality, which was an outcome 
of the Cartesian denial that one substance could act upon 
another, which in turn was inspired by the success of physics 
in establishing purely physical causal laws which seemed to 
account for all the motions of matter. In spite of this glaring 
defect, I have lingered on Leibniz’s system, because I believe 
that it contains hints for a metaphysic compatible with modern 
physics and with psychology, although of course it will require 
very serious modifications. 

The problem of perception remained unsolved, although it 
was one of the main pre-occupations of philosophers. Locke, 
important as he was, did not contribute much on this question, 
except his theory that primary qualities are objective and 
secondary qualities subjective; but his Essay led others to 
theories which have remained important. Berkeley discarded 
the material world, though he need not have discarded physics, 
since the formulae of physics may perfectly well be applicable 
to collections of mental events, as Leibniz supposed. Berkeley 
does not seem to have been influenced by the argument which 
affected the Cartesians — namely, the supposed impossibility 
of interaction between mind and matter. What influenced 
Berkeley was rather the epistemological argument, that every- 
thing with which we are acquainted is a mental event, and 
there is no valid reason for inferring that there are events of 
quite another kind. This typ^ of argument is, I think, new 
in Berkeley, when regarded as a source of metaphysics; in 
another form, it achieved fame throi^h Kant. Hume carried 
the same type of reasoning much further than Berkeley did, 
since he was content to remain sceptical, whereas Berkeley 
employed scepticism about matter as a support of religion, 
and therefore had to limit the scope of his criticism of what 
passed as knowledge. Hume’s criticism of the notion of cause 
cut at the root of science, and demanded an answer impera- 



i6o FROM COMMON SENSE TO PHYSICS 

tively. Of course innumerable answers were forthcoming, but 
I cannot persuade myself that any of them were in any degree 
valid, not even that of Kant. I do not wish, however, to 
discuss at this moment any philosophy which has still a more 
than historical interest, as is the case with Berkeley, Hmne, 
and Kant. Let us therefore return from this excursus to 
topics more intimately connected with science. 

The profound and lasting effect of Cartesianism upon the 
outlook of philosophers and men of science was to widen the 
gulf between mind and matter. Physicists were satisfied with 
the view that their science could be pursued independently 
of considerations concerned with mind, and contentedly left 
the philosophers to wrangle, under the impression that philo- 
sophy did not matter to them. For a time, from the point of 
view of the progress of science, there was much truth in this 
view; but in the long nm science cannot shut its eyes to 
problems which are logically relevant to its investigations. It 
may be admitted that most of what has passed for philosophy 
would not have been very useful to the men of science ; but 
that was chiefly because philosophy was no longer being 
created by men like Descartes and Leibniz, who were of 
supreme eminence in science as well. It may be hoped that 
this state of affairs is coming to an end. 

The “ matter ” of the Cartesians, owing to their denial of 
interaction between mind and matter, should have been just 
as abstract, and just as purely mathematical, as in the most 
modem physics. But in fact this was not the case: the 
technique of the period still depended upon notions which had 
an immediate basis in our own experience. We may perhaps 
distinguish three sorts of physics, in relation to the sense- 
experiences from which their ideas are derived: I will call 
them muscular physics, touch physics, and sight physics 
respectively. Of course no one of them has ever existed in 
isolation ; actual physics has always been a mixture of the three. 



FROM COMMON SENSE TO PHYSICS i6i 

But it will be a help in analysis to imagine a separation of each 
from the others, and ask ourselves which elements in actual 
physics belong to the first, which to the second, and which to 
the third. Broadly we may say that sight-physics has more 
and more predominated, and has achieved an almost complete 
victory over the others in the theory of relativity. 

Muscular physics is embodied in the idea of " force.” 
Newton evidently thought of force as a vera causa, not as a 
mere term in a mathematical equation. This was natural; 
we all know the experience of ” exerting force,” and are aware 
that it is connected with setting bodies in motion. By a sort 
of imconscious animism, physicists supposed that something 
analogous occurs whenever one body sets amother in motion. 
Unfortunately for dynamics we have the experience of 
" exerting force ” when we merely cause a body to preserve a 
constant velocity, as in dragging a weight along a road; this 
misled Aristotle into thinking that force was to be regarded as 
the cause of velocity, not of acceleration, a mistake first cor- 
rected by Galileo — though Leonardo came very near seeing the 
truth. It may be said: if force is a mathematical fiction, how 
can it be more ” true ” to regard it as proportional to the 
acceleration than to regard it as proportional to the velocity ? 
The reason is that laws can be foimd connecting force with the 
situation of a body relative to other bodies, if force is defined 
as Galileo defined it, but not if it is defined as Aristotle defined 
it. Galileo’s discovery that falling bodies have a constant 
acceleration, which is the same for all {in vacuo), is a very 
simple instance. More generally we may say; The laws of 
physics are, as a rule, differential equations of the second 
order — ^with respect to time in Newtonian physics, and with 
respect to interval in the physics of Einstein. This is a very 
different notion from that of force as derived from experience 
of muscular exertion ; yet the one has led to the other by an 
evolution containing many intermediate links. 



i 62 


FROM COMMON SENSE TO PHYSICS 


Touch-physics has led to the passion for conceiving the 
world as composed of billiard balls — a passion which existed 
already in the Greek atomists. We know what it is to bump 
into people, or to have them bump into us ; we know that when 
this happens motion is communicated without the exercise of 
volition. Billiard balls exhibit the phenomena concerned in the 
best form for elementary mathematical manipulation. The 
way billiard balls move when they hit each other is not at all 
surprising; on the contrary, in a general way it is such as 
everyone would expect. If all the world consisted of billiard 
balls, it would be what is called “ intelligible ” — i.e. it would 
never surprise us sufficiently to make us realize that we do not 
tmderstand it. The conservation of momentum, which is 
exemplified in the impacts of billiard balls, seemed to give an 
admirably simple view of the whole occurrence. We can re- 
gard momentum as “ quantity of motion,” and say that in an 
impact a certain quantity of motion is interchanged between 
two bodies, just as nowadays electrons are exchanged when 
one body becomes positively electrified and another negatively. 
This view was preferable to that which used force, because it 
did not seem to demand of matter anything even remotely 
analogous to volition ; it was therefore beloved of pre-N ewtonian 
materialism. It has, however, completely disappeared from 
modem notions of the structure of matter. The " atoms ” 
which are believed to exist — electrons and protons — never come 
into contact, but move as if they exerted attractions and re- 
pulsions at a distance ; these, however, are explained as due to 
something transmitted through the intervening medium. 
What has remained from touch-physics is an objection to 
” action at a distance.” But this objection can hardly be now 
attributed to an a priori prejudice; it is rather the outcome of 
experiment. We believe that, when one body seems to influence 
another at a distance, this is either capable of being explained 
away, or is attributed to the continuous passage of energy 



FROM COMMON SEN^ TO PHYSICS 163 

across the space between the two bodies; but we believe this 
because it is the view which fits best with known facts, not 
because it seems the only “ intelligible ” view. The latter 
opinion is no doubt widely held, but is not required to justify 
existing physical theories. 

Sight-physics has inevitably been dominant in astronomy, 
owing to the fact that sight is the only sense by means of 
which we have cognizance of the heavenly bodies. So long 
as we only see a motion, we are not conscious of anything 
analogous to force. The fact that gravitation remained so 
long imexplained may have stimulated the desire of theoretical 
physicists to develop their subject without the notion of 
“ force," since the " force ” of gravitation remained totally 
obscure. Sight-physics also had the advantage that it dealt 
with a wider range of phenomena than were included in 
djmamics, since it included everything to do with light. Thus 
physics came more and more to use only such notions as were 
intelligible in terms of visual data. Mass, it is true, remained 
from another order of ideas. Obviously the sensational source 
of the idea of mass is the feeling of weight . But even mass has 
gradually yielded. On the one hand, it is less fimdamental 
than it formerly seemed; on the other hand, it can be inferred 
from optical data, by the deflection from a straight line which 
a body suffers in a known field of force. (Consider methods of 
determining the apparent masses of a and P particles.) Sight- 
physics also makes the relativity of motion much more evident 
than either of the other kinds. A train exerts force, eind a 
railway station does not, so that, from this point of view, it 
seems natural and right to say that the train is " really ” 
moving while the station is " really ” at rest. But from a 
visual point of view the appearance of the station from the 
train is exactly correlative to that of the train from the station. 

In the visual world, quite independently of the velocity of 
light, a rapid movement can be produced by a very small 



i 64 from CX)MM0N SENSE TO PHYSICS 

“ force ’’ — ^for instance, by rotating a mirror which is reflecting 
a bright light. Rotating lighthouses at night send out beams 
which can be seen travelling with great rapidity. A beam is 
not a “ thing,” because it is not tangible, and yet, for common 
sense, it preserves its identity while it rotates. But common 
sense is not shocked when the beam is broken up into a series 
of events. A purely visual view of matter makes it much 
easier to regard all material things as series of events, like the 
rotating beam. 

Of course I am not suggesting that the other senses should 
be ignored as sources of knowledge concerning the physical 
world. What I am saying is that physics has tended, more 
and more, to interpret the information derived from the other 
senses by means of an imaginative picture derived from sight. 
Perhaps there are reasons for this; indeed, two suggest them- 
selves, one physical and one physiological. Anticipating later 
discussions, we may say that fairly accurate perception is only 
possible when there is a causal chain, leading from the object 
to the sense-organ, which is to a considerable extent inde- 
pendent of what is to be found in the intermediate regions. 
Whether this is the case or not is a question for physics. 
Touch is confined to bodies with which the observer is in 
contact ; smell and sound are not diffused very far. But light- 
waves travel with extraordinarily bttle modification through 
empty space, and without very great modification through a 
clear atmosphere. If we were to accept Professor Lewis’s 
theory mentioned in Chapter XIII., we could say that a light- 
quantum travels unchanged from a star to a human eye. 
Even if this theory is not true, the mere fact that it can be 
seriously proposed illustrates the causal “ purity ” (if I may 
use such a word) of the passage of light from one body to 
another. This is the physical merit of sight as a source of 
knowledge concerning the external world. 

The other merit is physiological. One kind of physical 



FROM COMMON SENSE TO PHYSICS 


165 


stimulus is better than another, as a somce of information, if 
less energy is required to produce a noticeable sensation, and 
smaller physical differences are required to produce noticeable 
differences of sensation. In both these respects, light is 
peculiarly excellent. The energy in the light from a just 
perceptible star is of the order of one quantum per cubic 
metre.* Very small differences of wave-length produce per- 
ceptible differences of colour, and stars are seen as separate 
even when the angle between the rays from them to the eye 
is very minute. In these respects, sight is markedly the best 
of the senses. It is therefore not surprising that physics has 
laid increasing stress upon visual data. 

At the level of common sense, the most important merit of 
sight is that it makes us aware of objects at a distance. Sound 
and smell do this to some extent — smell, however, is much 
more important to certain species of animals than to us. But 
neither sound nor smell carry over great distances, and they 
do not enable us to locate their source at all accurately. If we 
accept the usual causal theory of perception — as I think we 
should — the proximate physical cause of the physiological 
occurrences leading to a visual perception is not something 
happening in the object which we say we see, but something 
happening at the surface of the eye. If this is to give us in- 
formation about the distant object, it must be, in the main, 
causally determined by the object, without regard to anything 
intervening between the object and the eye. This is the 
physical merit of sight which we mentioned a moment ago. 
It has, of course, very distinct limitations. The colour of the 
light which reaches the eye will be different from that emitted 
by the object if there is intervening mist or coloured glass. 
The direction can be altered by a refracting medium. Mirrors 
deceive animals and young children. Then there are more 
subtle matters, such as the Doppler effect and aberration. But 
• Jeans, op. cit., p. 29. 



i66 


FROM COMMON SENSE TO PHYSICS 


after making all these allowances, sight remains supreme as 
a method of acquiring knowledge about distant objects. 

In one respect, sight is defective — ^namely, in regard to 
distance. Some psychologists argue that depth can be, to a 
certain extent, perceived by sight alone, while others contend 
that it is wholly derived from other data. However that may 
be, it is certain that sight alone cannot judge any but very small 
distances. No one can distinguish between a hundred yards 
and a hundred miles by sight alone. Infants do not know 
at all, at first, which visual objects are within their grasp 
and udiich are not. For practical purposes, visual space has 
only two dimensions, even if this is not strictly correct in 
psychological theory. In practice, when we know the " real ” 
size of a distant object, say a man or a cow, we can judge its 
distance by its apparent size.* But our initial experience of 
distance is derived from the amount of bodily movement 
required to establish contact. We may only have to stretch 
out an arm, we may have to lean the body, or we may have 
to walk for some time. An hour’s walk is a natural measure 
of distance — in fact, it is a league. We cannot arrive at the 
common-sense idea of space without bringing in movement. 
And measurement with a measuring rod involves movement, 
if the distance to be measured is longer than the rod. Of 
course there is space in our own body, which is known without 
movement : we refer a headache to the head and a stomach- 
ache to the stomach. But this space is limited, and does not 
give spatial relations between our body and objects merely 
seen. To acquire a knowledge of these relations, bodily 
movement is indispensable. And this would never have been 
available for the purpose if there were not so many objects 
surroimding us which are motionless relatively to the earth. 

* To show the depth of Dover clifi, Shakespeare says: 

" The crows and choughs that wing the midway air 
Show scarce so gross as beetles." 



FROM COMMON SENSE TO PHYSICS 


167 


We can discover the distance of a house by walking to it, but 
not of a fox by the distance we have to gallop before reaching 
him. 

Science cannot dispense wholly with postulates, but as it 
advances their number decreases. I mean by a postulate 
something not very different from a working hypothesis, 
except that it is more general : it is something which we assume 
without sufficient evidence, in the hope that, by its help, we 
shall be able to construct a theory which the facts will confirm. 
It is by no means essential to science to assume that its 
postulates are true always or necessarily ; it is enough if they 
are often true. They ought to be so used that, when they 
are true, they yield verifiable theories, but, when they are not 
true, no theory can be framed which will fit the facts — until 
we find a way of working with different postulates. 

The most important postulate of science is induction. This 
may be formulated in various ways, but, however formulated, 
it must yield the result that a correlation which has been found 
true in a number of cases, and has never been found false, has 
at least a certain assignable degree of probability of being 
always true. I propose to assume the validity of induction, 
not because I know of any conclusive grounds in its favour, 
but because it seems, in some form, essential to science and 
not deducible from anything very different from itself. I do 
not propose to discuss it, because the problem concerns em- 
pirical knowledge in general, not physics in particular; also 
because the subject is so complicated that a discussion is 
useless tinless it is very lengthy. For the moment I must 
refer the reader to Mr Ke5mes and his critics.* 

* A Treatise on Probability. By John Maynard Keynes. Mac- 
millan, 1920. 

Le Problime Logique de ITnduclion. Par Jean Nicod. Paris, Alcan. 

^Review of the above by Braithwaite, Mind, 1925. 

The Foundations of Probability. By R. H. Nisbet, Mind, January, 



168 


FROM COMMON SENSE TO PHYSICS 


The other postulates which were at one time thought 
necessary have gradually been found to be superfluous. At 
one time, the indestructibility of matter would have been 
regarded as a postulate. Now, though electrons and protons 
are supposed to persist as a rule, it is seriously suggested that 
an electron and a proton may sometimes combine so as to 
annihilate each other; Eddington has advanced this as an 
important possible source of stellar energy.* It is true that, 
in this process, energy is supposed to be not destroyed; but 
the conservation of energy is no more than an empirical 
generalization, and is not thought to be strictly true. 

Spatio-temporal continuity was, until lately, a postulate of 
science, but the quantum theory has called it in question 
without intellectual disaster. It may be true, but we cannot 
say that it must be. 

The existence of causal laws perhaps deserves to rank as 
a postulate, or may perhaps be proved probable, on the 
existing evidence, if induction is assumed. Here our proviso 
is relevant, that a postulate need not be supposed to hold 
universally. We shall assume that there are causal laws, and 
try to discover them ; but if none are found in a given region, 
that merely means that science cannot conquer that region. 
There are at present important regions of this kind. We do 
not know why a radio-active atom disintegrates at one moment 
rather than another, or why a planetary electron changes its 
orbit at one moment rather than another. We cannot be sure 
that these occurrences severally are governed by laws ; but if 
they are not, science cannot deal with them individually, and 
is confined to statistical averages. Whether this will prove to 
be the case, we cannot yet say. 

* Nature, May i, 1926, supplement. 



CHAPTER XVII 


WHAT IS AN EMPIRICAL SCIENCE ? 

It would be generally agreed that physics is an empirical 
science, as contrasted with logic and pure mathematics. I 
want, in this chapter, to define in what this difference consists. 

We may observe, in the first place, that many philosophers 
in the past have denied the distinction. Thorough-going 
rationalists have believed that the facts which we regard as 
only discoverable by observation could really be deduced from 
logical and metaphysical principles ; thorough-going empiricists 
have believed that the premisses of pure mathematics are 
obtained by induction from experience. Both views seem to 
me false, and are, I think, rarely held in the present day; 
nevertheless, it will be as well to exeimine the reasons for 
thinking that there is an epistemological distinction between 
pure mathematics and physics, before trying to discover its 
exact nature. 

There is a traditional distinction between necessary and 
contingent propositions, and another between analytic and 
synthetic propositions. It was generally held before Kant that 
necessary propositions were the same as analytic propositions, 
and contingent propositions were the same as synthetic pro- 
positions. But even before Kant the two distinctions were 
different, even if they effected the same division of propositions. 
It was held that every proposition is necessary, assertoric, or 
possible, and that these are ultimate notions, comprised under 
the head of “ modality.” I do not think much can be made 
of modality, the plausibility of which seems to have come 
from confusing propositions with propositional functions. 
Propositions may, it is true, be divided in a way corresponding 
169 



170 WHAT IS AN EMPIRICAL SCIENCE ? 

to what was meant by analytic and synthetic; this will be 
explained in a moment. But propositions which are not 
analytic can only be true or false ; a true synthetic proposition 
cannot have a further property of being necessary, and a false 
S5mthetic proposition cannot have the property of being 
possible. Propositional functions, on the contrary, are of 
three kinds : those which are true for all values of the argument 
or arguments, those which are false for all values, and those 
which are true for some arguments and false for others. The 
first may be called necessary, the second impossible, the third 
possible. And these terms may be transferred to propositions 
when they are not known to be true on their own accoimt, but 
what is known as to their truth or falsehood is deduced from 
knowledge of propositional functions. E.g." it is possible that 
the next man I meet will be caUed John Smith ” is a deduction 
from the fact that the propositional fvmction " x is a man 
and is called John Smith ” is possible — i.e. true for some 
values of x and false for others. Where, as in this instance, 
it is worth while to say that a proposition is possible, the fact 
rests upon our ignorance. With more knowledge, we should 
know who is the next man I shall meet, and then it would be 
certain that he is John Smith or certain that he is not John 
Smith. Possibility in this sense thus becomes assimilated to 
probability, and may count as any degree of probability other 
than 0 and i. An " assertoric ” proposition, similarly, was, 
I think, a confused notion applicable to a proposition known 
to be true but abo known to be a value of a propositional 
fimction which is sometimes fabe — e.g. " John Smith is bald.” 

The distinction of analytic and synthetic is much more 
relevant to the difference between pure mathematics and 
physics. Traditionally, an “analytic” proposition was one 
whose contradictory was self-contradictory, or, what came to 
the same thing in Aristotelian logic, one which ascribed to a 
subject a predicate which was part of it — e.g. “ white horses 



WHAT IS AN EMPIRICAL SCIENCE ? 171 

are horses.” In practice, however, an analytic proposition 
was one whose truth could be known by means of logic alone. 
This meaning survives, and is still important, although we 
can no longer use the definition in terms of subject and pre- 
dicate or that in terms of the law of contradiction. When 
Kant argued that " 7 -1-5=12 ” is S5mthetic, he was using the 
subject-predicate definition, as his argument shows. But 
when we define an analytic proposition as one which can 
be deduced from logic alone, then " 7-1-5=12 ” is analytic. 
On the other hand, the proposition that the sum of the angles 
of a triangle is two right angles is S5mthetic. We must ask 
ourselves, therefore ; What is the common quality of the pro- 
positions which can be deduced from the premisses of 
logic ? 

The answer to this question given by Wittgenstein in his 
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus seems to me the right one. 
Propositions which form part of logic, or can be proved by 
logic, are all tautologies — i.e. they show that certain different 
sets of symbols are different ways of saying the same thing, 
or that one set says part of what the other says. Suppose I 
say Up implies q, then not-y implies not-^.” Wittgenstein 
asserts that " p implies q " and " not-y implies not-^ ” are 
merely different symbols for one proposition: the fact which 
makes one true (or fake) is the same as the fact which makes 
the other true (or false). Such propositions, therefore, are 
really concerned with symbok. We can know their truth or 
falsehood without studying the outside world, because they 
are only concerned with s3mibolic manipulations. I should 
add — though here Wittgenstein might dissent — that all pure 
mathematics consists of tautologies in the above sense. If 
this is true, then obviously empiricists such as J. S. Mill are 
wrong when they say that we believe 2 -1-2=4 because we have 
foimd so many instances of its truth that we can madce an 
induction by simple enumeration which has little chance of 



[72 


WHAT IS AN EMPIRICAL SCIENCE ? 


being wrong. Every unprejudiced person must agree that such 
a view feds wrong: our certainty concerning simple mathema- 
tical propositions does not seem analogous to our certainty 
that the sun will rise to-morrow. I do not mean that we feel 
more sure of the one than of the other, though perhaps we 
ought to do so; I mean that our assurance seems to have a 
different source. 

I accept the view, therefore, that some propositions are 
tautologies and some are not, and I regard this as the dis- 
tinction underlying the old distinction of analytic and synthetic 
propositions. It is obvious that a proposition which is a 
tautology is so in virtue of its form, and that any constants 
which it may contain can be tiimed into variables without 
impairing its tautological quality. We may take as a stock 
example: " If Socrates is a man and all men are mortal, then 
Socrates is mortal.” This is a value of the general logical 
tautology : 

” For all values of x, a, and p, if x is an o, and all a's are 
P's, then X is a/J.” 

In logic, it is a waste of time to deal with particular examples 
of general tautologies; therefore constants ought never to 
occur, except such as are purely formal. The cardinal numbers 
turn out to be purely formal in this sense; therefore all the 
constants of pure mathematics are purely formal. 

A proposition cannot be a tautology unless it is of a certain 
complexity, exceeding that of the simplest propositions. It is 
obvious that there is more complexity in equating two ways 
of saying the same thing than there is in either way separately. 
It is obvious also that, whenever it is actually useful to know 
that two sets of symbols say the same thing, or that one says 
part of what the other says, that must be because we have some 
knowledge as to the truth or falsehood of what is expressed 
by one of the sets. Consequently logical knowledge would be 
very unimportant if it stood alone; its importance arises 



WHAT IS AN EMPIRICAL SCIENCE ? 173 

through its combination with knowledge of propositions which 
are not purely logical. 

All the propositions which are not tautologies we shall call 
“ synthetic.” The simplest kinds of propositions must be 
synthetic, in virtue of the above argument. And if logic or 
pure mathematics can ever be employed in a process leading 
to knowledge that is not tautological, there must be sources 
of knowledge other than logic and pure mathematics. 

The distinctions hitherto considered in this chapter have 
been logical. In the case of modality, it is true, we found 
a certain confusion from an admixture of epistemological 
notions ; but modality was intended to be logical, and in one 
form it was found to be so. We come now to a distinction 
which is essentially epistemological, that, namely, between 
a priori and empirical knowledge. 

Knowledge is said to be a priori when it can be acquired 
without requiring any fact of experience as a premiss; in the 
contrary case, it is said to be empirical. A few words are 
necessary to make the distinction clear. There is a process 
by which we acquire knowledge of dated events at times 
closely contiguous to them; this is the process called “ per- 
ception " or ” introspection ”* according to the character of 
the events concerned. There is no doubt need of much dis- 
cussion as to the nature of this process, and of still more as to 
the nature of the knowledge to be derived from it ; but there 
can be no doubt of the broad fact that we do acquire knowledge 
in this way. We wake up and find that it is daylight, or that 
it is still night; we hear a clock strike; we see a shooting star; 
we read the newspaper ; and so on. In all these cases we acquire 
knowledge of events, and the time at which we acquire the 
knowledge is the same, or nearly the same, as that at which 
the events take place. I shall call this process “ perception,’* 

* I do not wish to prejudice the question whether there is such a 
process as " introspection," but only to include it if it exists. 



*74 


WHAT IS AN EMPIRICAL SCIENCE 


and shall, for convenience, include introspection — if this is 
really different from what is commonly called “ perception.” 
A fact of " experience " is one which we could not have known 
without the help of perception. But this is not quite clear 
until we have defined what we mean by ” could not for 
clearly we may learn from experience that 2+2=4, though 
we afterwards realize that the experience was not logically 
indispensable. In such cases, we see afterwards that the 
experience did not prove the proposition, but merely suggested 
it, and led to our finding the real proof. But, in view of the 
fact that the distinction between empirical and a priori is 
epistemological, not logical, it is obviously possible for a pro- 
position to change from the one class to the other, since the 
classification involves reference to the organization of a 
particular person’s knowledge at a particular time. So re- 
garded, the distinction might seem unimportant; but it 
suggests some less subjective distinctions, which are what we 
really wish to consider, 

Kant's philosophy started from the question: How are 
synthetic a priori judgments possible ? Now we must first 
of all make a distinction. Kant is concerned with knowledge, 
not with mere belief. There is no philosophical problem in the 
fact that a man can have a belief which is synthetic and not 
based on experience — e.g. that this time the horse on which 
he has put his money will win. The philosophical problem 
arises <mly if there is a class of synthetic a priori beliefs which 
is always true. Kant considered the propositions of pure 
mathematics to be of this kind; but in this he was misled by 
the comment opinion of his time, to the effect that geometry, 
though a branch of pure mathematics, gave information about 
actual space. Owing to non-£uclidean geometry, particularly 
as applied in the theory of relativity, we must now distinguish 
sharply between the geometry applicable to actual space, 
which is an empirical study forming part of physics, and the 



WHAT IS AN EMPIRICAL SCIENCE ? 175 

geometry of pure mathematics, which gives no information as 
to actual space. Consequently this instance of synthetic 
a priori knowledge, upon which Kant relied, is no longer 
available. Other kinds have been supposed to exist — for 
example, ethical knowledge, and the law of causality ; but it is 
not necessary for our purposes to decide whether these kinds 
really exist or not. So far as physics is concerned, we may 
assume that all real knowledge is either 4ependent (at least in 
part) upon perception, or analytic in the sense in which pure 
mathematics is analytic. The Kantian synthetic a priori 
knowledge, whether it exists or not, seems not to be found in 
physics — unless, indeed, the principle of induction were to 
count as such. 

But the principle of induction, as we have already seen, 
has its origin in physiology, and this suggests a quite different 
treatment of a priori beliefs from that of Kant. Whether 
there is a priori knowledge or not, there undoubtedly are, in a 
certain sense, a priori beliefs. We have reflexes which we 
inteUectualize into beliefs; we blink, and this leads us to the 
belief that an object touching the eye will hurt it. We may 
have this belief before we have experience of its truth ; if so, 
it is, in a sense, synthetic a priori knowledge — i.e. it is a belief, 
not based upon experience, in a true synthetic proposition. 
Our belief in induction is essentially analogous. But such 
beliefs, even when true, hardly deserve to be called knowledge, 
since they are not all true, and therefore all require verifica- 
tion before they ought to be regarded as certain . These beliefs 
have been useful in generating science, since they supplied 
hypotheses which were largely true; but they need not survive 
untested in modem science. 

I shall therefore assume that, at any rate in every depart- 
ment relevant to physics, all knowledge is either analytic in 
the sense in which logic and pure mathematics are anal}dic, 
or is, at least in part, derived from perception. And all know- 



176 WHAT IS AN EMPIRICAL SCIENCE ? 

ledge which is in any degree necessarily dependent upon per- 
ception I shall call " empirical." I shall regard a piece of 
knowledge as necessarily dependent upon perception when, 
after a careful analysis of our grounds for believing it, it is 
found that among these grounds there is the cognition of an 
event in time, arising at the same time as the event or very 
shortly after it, and fulfilling certain further criteria which 
are necessary in order to distinguish perception from certain 
kinds of error. These criteria will occupy us in the next 
chapter. 

In a science, there are two kinds of empirical propositions. 
There are those concerned with particular matters of fact, and 
those concerned with laws induced from matters of fact. The 
appearances presented by the sun and moon and planets on 
certain occasions when they have been seen are particular 
matters of fact. The inference that the sun and moon and 
planets exist even when no one is observing them — in particular, 
that the sun exists at night and the planets by day — is an 
empirical induction. Heraclitus thought the sun was new 
every day, and there was no logical impossibility in this hypo- 
thesis. Thus empirical laws not only depend upon particular 
matters of fact, but are inferred from these by a process which 
falls short of logical demonstration. They differ from pro- 
positions of pure mathematics both through the nature of their 
premisses and through the method by which they are inferred 
from these premisses. 

In an advanced science such as physics, the part played by 
pure mathematics consists in connecting various empirical 
generalizations with each other, so that the more general laws 
which replace them are based upon a larger number of matters 
of fact. The passage from Kepler’s laws to the law of gravita- 
tion is the stock instance. Each of the three laws was based 
upon a certain set of facts; all three sets of facts together 
formed the basis of the law of gravitation. And, as usually 



. WHAT IS AN EMPIRICAL SCIENCE ? 


C77 


happens in such cases, new facts, not belonging to any of the 
three previous sets, were found to support the new law — for 
instance, the facts of tides, of lunar motion, and of perturba- 
tions. Epistemologically, in such cases, a fact is a premiss for 
a law; logically, most of the relevant facts are consequences 
of the law — i.e. all except those required to determine the 
constants of integration. 

In history and geography, the empirical facts are, at present, 
more important than any generalizations based upon them. 
In theoretical physics, the opposite is the case ; the fact that 
the sun and moon exist is chiefly interesting as affording 
evidence of the law of gravitation and the laws of the trans- 
mission of light. In a philosophic analysis of physics, we need 
not consider particular facts except when they form the 
evidence for a theory. It is of course part of the business of 
such an analysis to consider what all particular facts have in 
common, and how they come to be known; but such inquiries 
are general. We are interested in the concept of topography, 
but not in the actual topography of the universe; at least, we 
are not interested in it for its own sake, but only as affording 
the evidence for general laws. 

We have, in view of the above considerations, several 
different matters to consider, before we can return to actual 
physics. We have first to consider the nature and validity of 
the process we have called “ perception ”; next we have to 
investigate the general character of the facts known by per- 
ception; and lastly we have to examine the inference from 
facts of perception to empirical laws. After disposing of these 
topics, we shall resume contact with physics, asking ourselves 
now, not what physics asserts, but what justification it has 
for its assertions, and what inessential modifications will 
increase this justification. 


12 



CHAPTER XVIII 

OUR KNOWLEDGE OF PARTICULAR MATTERS OF FACT 
In this chapter, I wish to consider whatever would ordinarily 
pass for knowledge of particular matters of fact, in so far as 
this is not obtained by a process of deliberate scientific in- 
ference . I want to consider this as far as possible independently 
of the scientific laws based upon it, though not completely 
without reference to the primitive beliefs by which common 
sense draws inferences from perceptions. In particular, I 
wish to abstain from introducing the causal theory of per- 
ception, unless, on investigation, this should prove impossible. 
It will be understood that my purpose is epistemological; I 
am considering perception because it is involved in the pre- 
misses of empirical sciences, not because it is interesting as a 
mental process. It is of course necessary to consider its 
intrinsic character, but we do not do this for its own sake, we 
do it for the sake of the light that it may throw upon the 
character and extent of our knowledge. 

We are met at the outset by a difficulty due to the fact that 
philosophical terminology is inappropriate when the views to 
be expressed are in any way unusual. " Knowledge ” and 
“ belief ” both have connotations which are inconvenient for 
the purpose I have in view. They are both commonly applied 
in orthodox psychology to something conscious and explicit, 
such as is, or may be, already expressed in words. For our 
purposes, it is desirable to include more primitive occurrences, 
such as may be supposed to exist in animals . Obviously a bird 
can see an approaching man, and fly away in consequence. 
I wish to include \mder " perception ” what happens in the 
bird, and also to say that the bird " knows ” something when 
it sees a man, though I shall not venture to say what it knows. 

178 



KNOWLEDGE OF PARTICULAR MATTERS OF FACT 179 

But at this point a good deal of caution is necessary. My 
knowledge of the bird is part of my knowledge of the external 
world, and is partly, if not wholly, physical knowledge. There- 
fore when I am asking: how do I know about the physical 
world ? I have no right to begin by comparing my knowledge 
with that of a bird. I must start from myself and my own 
cognitions, and use the bird only to suggest h5T)Otheses. This 
caution applies also to what was said in Chapter XV. 

Again, there is always a danger, in epistemology, of putting 
the less certain before the more certain. My knowledge of the 
process of perceiving is less certain, and less primitive, than 
my knowledge of percepts. When I say, " I know that I have 
just heard a clap of thunder,” I am saying something not so 
indubitable as when I say, " There has just been a clap of 
thunder.” It is facts of this latter kind that are required as 
premisses in physics. A man might be completely competent 
as a physicist if he knew such propositions as " There has just 
been a clap of thunder ” even if he knew no propositions such 
as " I know that there has just been a clap of thimder.” The 
consideration of our knowing, as opposed to what we know, 
is forced on us by the fact that what we think we know some- 
times turns out to be false ; if this were not the case, an analysis 
of matter need not consider our knowing at all. As it is the 
case, we are compelled to examine our knowing, as well as 
what we know, with a view to discovering, if possible, how to 
minimize the risk involved in taking as knowledge what, on 
reflection, we still believe to be knowledge. 

We are often urged to adopt an artificial naivete in in- 
vestigating problems concerning what we know ; if we do not 
do so, we are accused of the “ psychologist’s fallacy.” Now 
in certain problems this caution is quite proper, but in others 
it is not . My problem is : What do I , here and now, know about 
the external world, and how do I know it ? It is obvious that 
my knowledge of the^extemal world carmot be dependent 



i8o KNOWLEDGE OF PARTICULAR MATTERS OF FACT 


upon (say) how long it takes a fish to leam to recognize the 
man who feeds it. since this supposes that I know all about the 
fish and the man and the feeding. Facts about the perceptions 
of babies, such as we considered in Chapter XV., come imder 
the same head. Long before I can know that there are babies, 
I must know many other things about the external world. I 
want to start from what comes epistemologically first in my 
existing knowledge now; and in this problem, obviously, I 
cannot assume that I already know adl about the experiences 
of animals and babies. There must therefore be no artificial 
naivete, but a straightforward investigation of my knowledge 
as I find it. 

The position may be illustrated by Chuang-Tze’s story of 
the two philosophers on the bridge. The first says : “ See how 
the little fishes are darting about. Therein consists the 
pleasure of fishes.” The second replies: ” How do you, not 
being a fish, know wherein consists the pleasure of fishes ?" 
To which the first retorts: ” How do you, not being I, know 
that I do not know wherein consists the pleasure of fishes ?” 
My position is that of the second philosopher. If other philo- 
sophers know ” wherein consists the pleasure of fishes,” I 
congratulate them; but I am not thus gifted. 

When I try to disenteingle the primitive from the inferred 
elements in what I take to be my knowledge, I find that the 
task is not really very difficult, except in certain niceties. 
The primitive part seems something like this: There are 
coloured shapes which move, there are noises, smells, bodily 
sensations, the experiences which we describe as those of touch, 
and so on. There are relations among these items: time- 
relations (earlier and later) among all of them, and space- 
relations (up-and-down, right-and-left, and the relations by 
which localization in the body is effected) among many of 
them. There are recollections of some of these things; this 
seeipas indubitable, although it is not easy to say in what a 



KNOWLEDGE OF PARTICULAR MATTERS OF FACT i8i 

recollection consists, or how it is related to what it recollects. 
There are also expectations; by this I mean something just as 
immediate as memory. Everyone knows the story of the 
Orangeman who fell off a scaffolding and murmured as he 
feU: “ To Hell with the Pope, and now for the — bump.” He 
was experiencing expectation in the sense in which I mean it. 
Of thoughts other than memories and expectations, it is not 
necessary to take accoimt when our sole purpose is to reach 
the primitive basis of our knowledge of matter. 

In the above account, I have omitted many things which 
I formerly “ knew," and which, apparently, most other people 
“ know.” I have omitted " objects.” In former days, my 
apparatus of non-inferential knowledge included tables and 
chairs and books and persons and the sun and moon and stars. 
I have come to regard these things as inferences. I do not 
mean that I inferred them formerly, or that other people do 
so now. I fully concede that I did not infer them. But now, 
as the result of an argument, I have become unable to accept 
the knowledge of them as valid knowledge, except in so far 
as it can be inferred from such knowledge as I still consider 
epistemologically primitive. 

The argument in question would naturally, but not validly, 
express itself in terms of the causal theory of perception. 
What I see — so it might be urged — is causally dependent upon 
the light waves that reach my eye, and these waves might be 
reflected or refracted in such a way as to deceive me con- 
cerning their source. This way of stating the argument is 
invalid because it assumes more knowledge of the physical 
world than we have any right to assume at our present level. 
But the facts upon which it relies can be easily made available, 
without any undue assumption of knowledge, for the purpose 
of proving our conclusion. In certain cases in which we seem 
to have immediate knowledge of objects, we find ourselves 
surprised by something totally unexpected. The dog listening 



i 82 knowledge of PARTICULAR MATTERS OF FACT 


to " his master’s voice ” on the gramophone may serve as an 
illustration. He thinks he perceives his master, but in fact 
he only perceives a noise. In restaurants which wish to look 
larger than they are, one whole wall sometimes consists of 
looking-glass, and it is easy to suppose that one perceives 
diners at tables, when in fact they are mere reflections. Per- 
spective can be made to deceive. When I say “ deceive,” in 
this connection, I mean “ rouse expectations which are not 
fulfilled.” It is useless to multiply examples. The upshot is 
that what seems like perception of an object is really perception 
of certain sensible qualities together with expectations of other 
sensible qualities — the commonest case being something visual 
which rouses tactual expectations. It is found that the oc- 
casional deceptive experiences are not, in themselves, dis- 
tinguishable from those that are not deceptive. Hence we 
conclude that we have to do with a correlation which is usual 
but not invariable, and that, if we wish to construct an exact 
science, we must be sceptical of the associations which ex- 
perience has led us to form, connecting sensible qualities with 
others with which they are often but not always combined. 

The above argument is based upon principles which common 
sense can be brought to accept, and has a conclusion which 
physics has accepted, though perhaps without fully realizing its 
scope. The argument is not " philosophical,” in the sense of 
coming from a region quite different from that of science and 
ordinary knowledge. It proceeds merely on the usual 
principle of trying to substitute something more accurate for 
a belief which has been found to lead to error on occasion. It 
has as a consequence that " matter," in physics and in philo- 
sophy, if legitimate at all, cannot be altogether identified with 
the conunon-sense notion of a material object, though it will 
have a certain connection with this notion, since the common - 
sense belief in material objects does not usually lead to false 
expectations. 



KNOWLEDGE OF PARTICULAR MATTERS OF FACT 183 


Some misunderstandings must be guarded against as regards 
expectation and error. Neither of these is primarily intel- 
lectual; I should be inclined to say that both are primarily 
muscular — or, we may say, nervous, in order not to seem 
paradoxical. Suppose you set to work to lift a watering-can ; 
you may adjust your muscles in the way appropriate if the 
can is full, or in the way appropriate if it is empty. If they 
are adjusted to a full can when the can is empty, you receive 
a shock of surprise on experiencing the lightness of the can. 
Y ou would describe your experience by saying, “ I thought the 
can was full of water . ” But as a rule, in such situations, there 
has not been anything that could be called “ thought there 
has been physiological adjustment as a result of a stimulus. 
Of course there may have been “ thought and whatever 
" thought ” may be, it certainly can produce the kind of 
muscular effects which we are considering. But these effects 
can be produced more directly, and usually are. There is so 
little essential difference between a process involving ‘ ' thought ’ ' 
and one not involving it that it seems a mistake to confine the 
notions of truth and error to intellectual processes; they ought 
rather, it seems to me, to be applied to the complete reaction 
of a person to a situation, in which “ thought ” is only one 
element. But it will not do, at our present level, to introduce 
physiology, since we are considering how we know about 
matter, and must not therefore assume that we already know 
about the matter in our own body. However, the phenomena 
are easily described in the way which our problem demands. 
In the case of the watering-can, the vivid part of the experience 
is the surprise. But by means of attention a number of other 
elements can be observed. We can observe the feelings which 
are interpreted as meeining muscular adjustment to a heavy 
load; we can observe the visual appearance described as the 
can coming up with a jerk; we can observe the sudden change 
in what, for short, we may call muscular feelings. It is im- 



184 KNOWLEDGE OF PARTICULAR MATTERS OF FACT 


possible to describe all this without circumlocution, since the 
natural words to use presuppose physiology; but it is clear 
that there is a great deal that can be directly obser\ ed, without 
invoking any theory. In sudi a process, what comes earlier 
may be described as “ error ’’ because oi the emotion of 
surprise which follows. Where the activity which has been 
begim runs its course without leading to this emotion, we shall 
say that there is not error. I hesitate to ascribe “ truth ” to 
something pre-intellectual, but at any rate we may say that 
there is “ correctness,” or that what has succeeded to the 
sensation (or perception) which came at the begiiming of the 
process has been ” correct.” We may shorten this by saying 
that the response to a stimulus may be ” correct ” or “er- 
roneous.’ ’ But the longer phrase has the merit of not assuming 
so much knowledge of causal relations. 

In the situations to which the above analysis applies, we 
have the advantage of a perfectly definite criterion of correct- 
ness or error. The feeling of surprise marks error, and the 
absence of this feeling marks correctness. It must not be sup- 
posed that we have normally an explicit prevision, still less 
an explicit inference ; all that can be said is that we are in such 
a ccxidition that one sort of event will cause surprise while 
another sort will not. Consider the experience we have all 
had, of " thinking ” we were at the bottom of a staircase when 
in fact there was another step to go down. In such a case, 
when we “ think ” we are at the bottom, we do not think at 
all, for if we did we should not make such a silly mistake. 
Indeed, we might say (or an Irishman might) : " I thought I 
was at the bottom because I wasn’t thinking." 

It is fairly clear that all our elementary intellectual pro- 
cesses have pre-intellectual analogues. The analogue of a 
general causal belief is a reflex or a habit. A dog goes to the 
dining-room when he hears the diimer-bell, and so do we. 
In the case of the dog, it is easy to suppose that he has merely 



KNOWLEDGE OF PARTICULAR MATTERS OF FACT 185 


acquired a habit, without having formulated the induction; 
" Dinner-bells are a cause, or an effect, or an indispensable 
part of the cause, of dinner.” We, however, can formulate 
this induction, and we shall then suppose that it is because 
we have done so that we go into the dining-room when we 
hear the bell. In fact, however, we may be just as merely 
habitual as the dog. The elementary inductions of common 
sense are first habits, and only subsequently beliefs. We may 
say that if, in our experience, A is accompanied by B either 
often or in some emotionally important manner, this fact 
causes first a habit which would be rational if A were always 
accompanied by B, and then a belief that A is always accom- 
panied by B — the latter being a rationalization of the pre- 
existing habit. 

General propositions may thus form part of our thinking 
from the start. Such general propositions are merely the 
verbal expression of habits. The hand-eye co-ordination 
becomes firmly fixed as a motor habit, and then, when we think, 
we conclude that what can be seen can often be touched — in 
fact, that it can be touched in circumstances which we know 
in practice, though we might have difficulty in formulating 
them exactly. Such general propositions are synthetic, and 
are in a certain sense a priori; for, though experience has 
caused them, they are not obtained by inference from other 
propositions, but by rationalizing and verbalizing our habits ; 
that is to say, their antecedents are pre-intellectual. The 
trouble with them is that they are never quite right. Common 
sense, do what it will, cannot avoid being surprised occasionally. 
The object of science is to spare it this emotion, and create 
mental habits which shall be in such close accord with the 
habits of the world as to secure that nothing shall be imex- 
pected. Science has, of course, not yet achieved its ideal ; the 
Great War and the earthquake of Tokyo took people by sur- 
prise. But it is hoped that in time such events will no longer 



i86 KNOWLEDGE OF PARTICULAR MATTERS OF FACT 

disturb us, because we shall have expected them. However, 
I do not wish at this stage to consider our knowledge of general 
propositions; it is particular matters of fact that concern us at 
present. 

Although, in our less intellectual moods, we act as the result 
of a sensation without stopping to think {e.g. when we blink 
because we see something approaching the eye), yet we can, 
when we choose, react to a stimulus in the way which is called 
“ knowing ” it, and we often react involuntarily in this way. 
It is not necessary, in an analysis of matter, to decide what 
"knowing” is; it is only necessary to decide what is known, 
in so far as this is relevant to our knowledge of physics. The 
list which I gave earlier in the present chapter was designed 
to be such as would exclude the risk of error, using “ error ’’ in 
the sense which I have been defining. Common sense is liable 
to err — of this we have already given instances. We cannot 
therefore include the common-sense notion of an " object " 
or " thing ” as part of what we know. But the sensible 
qualities which can be analyzed out of the “ thing ” can be 
admitted without ever leading us into error. These, there- 
fore, are to be accepted as genuinely known. 

It is a remarkable fact that all such knowledge, when not 
inferential, arises at about the same time as what is known, 
though it may survive for an indefinite time in the form of 
memory. This is the essential peculiarity, which we men- 
tioned earher, that distinguishes the empirical premisses of 
empirical knowledge. These consist of facts which become 
known spontaneously at about the time when they occur, 
and cannot be known sooner except by elaborate and more or 
less doubtful inferences from other such facts. The process of 
getting to know such facts without inference is called “ per- 
ception,” and knowledge derived wholly or partly from per- 
ception is said to be based on experience. A Greek could 
know the multiplication table as well as we do, but he could 
not know the biography of Napoleon. 



CHAPTER XIX 

DATA, INFERENCES. HYPOTHESES, AND THEORIES 
When a man of science speaks of his “ data,” he knows very 
well in practice what he means. Certain experiments have 
been conducted, and have yielded certain observed results, 
which have been recorded. But when we try to define a 
" datum” theoretically, the task is not altogether easy. A 
datum, obviously, must be a fact known by perception. But 
it is very difficult to arrive at a fact in which there is no 
element of inference, and yet it would seem improper to call 
something a " datum ” if it involved inference as well as 
observation . This constitutes a problem which must be briefly 
considered. 

What is recorded as the result of an experiment or observa- 
tion is never the bare fact perceived, but this fact as interpreted 
by the help of a certain amount of theory. Take, say, the 
eclipse observations by which Einstein’s theory of gravitation 
was confirmed. What in fact was given in perception was — 
apart from the previous arrangements — a visual pattern of 
dots, interpreted as a photograph of stars near the sim; a 
tactual- visual experience called “ measuring,” and finally 
coincidences of certain visual appearances with certain others 
called " numbers on a scale.” At least, whether this is actually 
a correct accoimt or not, it represents the sort of thing that 
occurred. A considerable amount of theory was involved in 
merely measuring the photographs. And of course a vast 
structure was involved in interpreting the photographs as 
photographs of stars, and in inferring thence the course which 
the light from the stars had pursued. It is the theoretical 
element in measuring the photographs that most needs to be 
stressed, since it is easily overlooked. 

187 



1 88 DATA, INFERENCES. HYPOTHESES, AND THEORIES 


It is sometimes maintained that there is something of the 
nature of inference at an even earlier stage. The effects of 
a given sensory stimulus upon two men with indistinguishable 
sense-organs but different experiences may be very different. 
The most obvious illustration is the effect of print upon a man 
who can read and upon a man who cannot. A child learning 
to read is aware of each letter in turn as a certain shape, and 
finally arrives, with pain and labour, at the word. A man 
who learned to read as a child is quite unconscious of the 
letters, imless he is interested in typography or looking out for 
misprints; normally, he passes straight to the words, and to the 
words as having meaning, not as black marks on white paper. 
Nevertheless, he is very likely to notice an oddity at once — 
say if someone omitted the j in " Nietzsche.” In writing to a 
philosopher to ask for a testimonial, it would be very unsafe 
to assume that he would not detect an error of this sort. But 
the detection of the error is due to the element of surprise : the 
philosopher is expecting a z, and has a shock when it is not 
there, like that of a man who has reached the bottom of a 
stairc2ise but thinks there is another step. The philosopher’s 
body was expecting a z, though his mind was otherwise 
occupied. 

A more orthodox illustration is the difference between the 
effect of a visual stimulus upon an ordinary man and upon 
a man bom blind but enabled to see as the result of an opera- 
tion. The latter has not the tactual associations of the 
ordinary man, and cannot " interpret ” what he sees. Are 
we to include in perception this element of unconscious inter- 
pretation, or are we to include only what we imagine that 
the same stimulus would have produced if there had been 
no such previous experience as would make interpretation 
possible ? This is not an altogether easy question. On the 
one hand, the interpretation depends upon correlations which 
are frequent but probably not invariable, so that, if it is in- 



DATA, inferences. HYPOTHESES. AND THEORIES i8g 

eluded, it might seem as though perception would sometimes 
contain an element of error. On the other hand, the element 
of interpretation can only be eliminated by an elaborate theory, 
so that what remains — the hypothetical bare “ sensation — is 
hardly to be called a “ datum,” since it is an inference from 
what actuaUy occurs. This last argument is, to my mind, 
conclusive. Perception must include those elements which 
are irredudbly physiological, but it need not on that account 
include those elements which come, or can be made to come, 
within the sphere of conscious inference. When we hear (say) 
a donkey braying, we are quite conscious of inference from 
the noise of the donkey, or at any rate we can easily become 
conscious of it. I should not, therefore, in this case, include 
anything else of the donkey with the perception, but only the 
noise. And if you see a donkey, though you may have re- 
actions connected with the sense of touch, these are never 
confounded with what you feel when you actually touch him. 
I should therefore say that a great deal of the interpretation 
that usually accompanies a perception can be made conscious 
by mere attention, and that this part ought not to be included 
in the perception. But the part which can only be discovered 
by careful theory, and can never be made introspectively 
obvious, ought to be included in the perception. Perhaps the 
line between the two is not so sharp as could be wished; but 
I do not see how else to meet the conflicting considerations 
which present themselves. 

We have still to ask ourselves whether perception, so 
defined, will sometimes contain an element of error. Here we 
must distinguish. It may be, and often is, accompanied by 
expectations which are disappointed; and we agreed to take 
this as the mark of error. But the expectations can be dis- 
tinguished from the perception, although in practice this may 
not alwa3rs be easy. The tactual accompaniments of visual 
perceptions are of the nature of expectations. There are no 



DATA, INFERENCES, HYPOTHESES. AND THEORIES 


such accompaniments of perceptions of the heavenly bodies. 
I think that in all cases in which error occurs it is easy to 
distinguish the erroneous expectation from the perception. 
Whatever “ interpretation ’’ does not involve expectations 
need not be regarded as erroneous. It is supposed that in- 
distinguishable stimuli may fall upon indistinguishable sense- 
organs, and yet result in distinguishable perceptions because 
of differences in the brains of the two percipients — these 
differences in their brains being the result of different ex- 
periences. But there is not on that account anything er- 
roneous in the perception of either. A different event occurs 
in the one from that which occurs in the other; but each event 
really occurs. This topic, however, cannot be adequately 
discussed until we come to the causal theory of perception and 
the relation between perception and physical stimulus. 

I come now to the question of inferences, which has already 
been touched on. As we have seen, there is a purely physio- 
logical form of inference which belongs to an earlier stage than 
explicit inference, though it persists in the habits of even the 
most sophisticated philosopher, such as Hume. The next stage 
is where there is an actual passage from one belief to another, 
but the passage is a mere occurrence, not a transition motived 
by an argument. In this case, the transition is usually caused 
by a physiological inference. Then there is inference based 
upon some belief ; but even then the belief may be wholly irra- 
tional, or it may not logically warrant the inference, which is 
the case of fallacious reasoning . Lastly , there is valid inference 
by means of a true principle — but of this I cannot give an 
indubitable instance. 

In historical fact, these types of inference emerge succes- 
sively, but a later type does not cause an earlier one to dis- 
appear. Moreover, the later type tends to be adapted to the 
earlier. First we have physiological inference: this is 
exemplified when a bird flies so as not to bump into solid 



DATA, INFERENCES. HYPOTHESES, AND THEORIES 191 


objects, and fails when it bumps into a window-pane. Then 
there is the transition from the belief expressing the premiss 
of the physiological inference to that expressing its conclusion, 
without any consciousness of how the transition is effected. 
Then there is belief in a causal law which is the intellectualized 
expression of the habit embodied in the physiological inference. 
And last of all there is the search for criteria by which to 
distinguish between true and false causal laws, these criteria 
being intellectual, not mere habits of the body. This last 
stage is only reached when we come to science. 

One of the main purposes of scientific inference is to justify 
beliefs which we entertain already; but as a rule they are 
justified with a difference. Our pre-scientific general beliefs 
are hardly ever without exceptions; in science, a law with 
exceptions can only be tolerated as a makeshift. Scientific 
laws, when we have reason to think them accmate, are different 
in form from the common-sense rules which have exceptions ; 
they are always, at least in physics, either differential equa- 
tions, or statistical averages. It might be thought that a 
statistical average is not very different from a rule with 
exceptions, but this would be a mistake. Statistics, ideally, 
are accurate laws about large groups; they differ from other 
laws only in being about groups, not about individuals. 
Statistical laws are inferred by induction from particular 
statistics, just as other laws are inferred from particular single 
occurrences. All this, however, is by the way ; the point is that 
inference as a practice has a long history before it becomes 
scientific. 

The most important inference which science takes over from 
common sense is inference to imperceived entities. One form 
in which common sense makes this inference is that of a belief 
that objects which have been perceived still exist when they 
are not perceived. If, at a dinner-party, the electric light 
suddenly goes out, no one doubts that his neighbours and the 



192 DATA. INFERENCES. HYPOTHESES. AND THEORIES 

dinner-table and the food and drink still exist, although at 
the moment they are unperceived. When the light goes on 
again, this belief appears to be confirmed; if there are fewer 
spoons than before, we do not infer that they have ceased to 
exist, but that someone present is a thief. This belief in the 
permanence of perceived objects has gone through all stages 
from physiological inference to advanced scientific or philo- 
sophical theory; the inquiry into its justification is the central 
problem in the analysis of matter, philosophically considered. 
No one. not even Berkeley, has treated it with quite the 
seriousness that it deserves, because the physiological inference 
is so irresistible that it is difficult to achieve a purely intel- 
lectual attitude towards the problem. This inference is the 
source of the philosophical notion of *' substance ” and the 
physical notion of “ matter.” For the present. I am only 
noting the inferences to be considered ; I am not attempting to 
investigate their validity. 

Unperceived entities are also inferred by common sense 
when it believes that other people have " minds.” I wish 
to make it clear that even the most rigid behaviourist makes 
this inference, although in a slightly different form. Dr 
Watson, for example, would admit that his own toothache can 
lead him to say, “ I have a toothache,” whereas another 
person’s toothache will not lead him to say " You have a 
toothache ” without some intermediate link. Whatever may 
be our analysis of ” knowledge,” we certainly know things 
about our own bodies in ways which are not open to us where 
other people’s bodies are concerned. 'There is nothing 
mysterious about this: it is analogous to the fact that some 
sounds are within earshot while others are not. The point 
is that we infer, from the behaviour of others, the existence 
of things (such as toothaches) which we cannot perceive. 
Whether we say that these things are ” mental ” or " bodily ” 
makes no difference to the fact that we make infer- 



DATA. INFERENCES. HYPOTHESES. AND THEORIES 193 

ences. These inferences, also, are at first purely physio- 
logical. 

From the point of view of physics, the inference to other 
people’s “ minds ” has a twofold importance. The first, 
which is not specially physical, is concerned with testimony. 
What is commonly accepted as the experimental evidence on 
any topic of physics includes not only what a given physicist 
has himself observed, but whatever has been reliably recorded. 
Everything that we learn from what other people say and 
write involves inference from something perceived (spoken or 
written words) to something unperceived — ^namely, the 
“ mental ” events of the speaker or writer. It may be that 
the primary inference is only to another person’s percepts, 
but it is none the less an inference to something which we do 
not perceive. The second point about the inference to other 
people’s percepts is specially physical; it concerns the fact 
that different people live in a common world. The percepts 
of two different people, if we accept testimony, are found 
to be often very similar, though not exactly alike ; this leads 
to the theory of a common external cause — i.e. to the causal 
theory of perception, and to the division of the qualities of the 
perceived object into such as belong to the external cause 
and such as are supplied by the body or mind of the 
percipient. 

The development of science out of common sense has not 
been by way of a radically new start at any moment, but rather 
by way of successive approximations. That is to say, where 
some difficulty has arisen which current common sense could 
not solve, a modification has been made at some point, while 
the rest of the common-sense view of the world has been re- 
tained. Subsequently, using this modification, another modi- 
fication has been introduced elsewhere; andsoon. Thusscience 
has been an historical growth, and has assumed, at each 
moment, a more or less vague backgroimd of theory derived 

13 



194 data, inferences. HYPOTHESES, AND THEORIES 


from common sense. This is one difference between science 
and philosophy; philosophy attempts, though not always 
successfully, to set out its inferences in a form which assumes 
nothing on the mere ground that it has always been assumed 
hitherto. It may be doubted whether science can retain its 
vitality if it is severed from its root in our animal habits; when 
set forth quite abstractly, it loses plausibility. Induction, for 
example, is difficult to justify, and yet indispensable in science. 
In such cases, I shall allow myself to accept what seems 
necessary on pragmatic grounds, being content, as science is, 
if the results obtained are often verifiably true and never 
verifiably false. But wherever a principle is accepted on such 
grounds as these, the fact should be noted, and we should 
realize that there remains an intellectual problem, whether 
soluble or not. 

The actual procedure of science consists of an alternation 
of observation, hypothesis, experiment, and theory. The 
only difference between a hypothesis and a theory is subjective : 
the investigator believes the theory, whereas he only thinks 
the hypothesis sufficiently plausible to be worth testing. A 
hypothesis should accord with all known relevant observations, 
and suggest experiments (or observations) which will have one 
result if the hypothesis is true, and another if it is false. This 
is an ideal: in actual fact, other hypotheses will always exist 
which are compatible with what is meant to be an experi- 
mentum cruets. The crucial character can only be as between 
two hypotheses, not as between one hypothesis eind all the 
rest. When a hypothesis has passed a sufficient number of 
experimental tests, it becomes a theory. The argument in 
favour of a theory is always the formally invalid argument : 
" p implies q, and q is true, therefore p is true.” Here p is the 
theory, and q is the observed relevant facts. We are most 
impressed when q is very improbable a priori. For example,* 
* Sommerfeld, op. cit., p. 217 . 



DATA. INFERENCES, HYPOTHESES, AND THEORIES 195 
observation gives Rydberg’s constant as; 

1*09678.10® 

while Bohr’s theory gives : 

R=?*09 .io® cm'S 

which is within the degree of accuracy to be expected if the 
theory is right. Numerical confirmations of this kind are 
always the most striking. Nevertheless, even they must be 
received with caution ; Bohr’s theory of circular orbits required 
modification by the admission of elliptic orbits, and thus 
turned out to be not the only theory which would give a correct 
value of Rydberg’s constant. 

When a theory fits a number of facts, but goes slightly 
astray in regard to certain others, it happens generally, though 
not always, that it can be absorbed, by a slight modification, 
into a new theory which includes the hitherto discrepant facts. 
There are exceptions, of which the theory of relativity is 
perhaps the most notable: here an immense theoretical recon- 
struction was required to account for very minute discrepancies. 
But in general a partially successful theory is an essential step 
towards its successor. And a result deduced from a hitherto 
successful theory is more likely to be right than the theory is : 
the theory is only right if all its consequences are true (at least, 
so far as they can be tested), but a verifiable consequence of 
the theory is likely to be true if most of the verifiable conse- 
quences are true. That is why the practical value of scientific 
theories is so much greater than their philosophic value as 
contributions to ultimate truth. To some extent, we can 
distinguish, among the consequences of a theory, which are 
the most reliable ; they will be those in the region of the facts 
which have given rise to the theory. No one is smqjrised to 
find that an empirical law connecting specific heat with 
temperature fails for temperatures much lower than those for 



196 DATA, INFERENCES, HYPOTHESES, AND THEORIES 

which it has been found to be correct; but if, in the middle of 
these latter, there was found to be a small range of tempera- 
tures where the law failed, we should be very much surprised. 
Thus there is a kind of common sense to be used in applying 
theories : some applications can be made with confidence, while 
others will be felt to be questionable. 



CHAPTER XX 

THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION * 

Common sense holds — though not very explicitly — that per- 
ception reveals external objects to us directly: when we “ see 
the sun,” it is the sun that we see. Science has adopted a 
different view, though without always realizing its implications. 
Science holds that, when we " see the sun," there is a process, 
starting from the sun, traversing the space between the sun 
and the eye, changing its character when it reaches the eye, 
changing its character again in the optic nerve and the brain, 
and finally producing the event which we call “ seeing the 
sun.” Our knowledge of the sun thus becomes inferential; 
our direct knowledge is of an event which is, in some sense, 
" in us.” This theory has two parts. First, there is the 
rejection of the view that perception gives direct knowledge 
of external objects; secondly, there is the assertion that it 
has external causes as to which something can be inferred 
from it. The first of these tends towards scepticism; the 
second tends in the opposite direction. The first appears as 
certain as anything in science can hope to be ; the second, on the 
contrary, depends upon postulates which have little more 
than a pragmatic justification. It has, however, all the merits 
of a good scientific theory — i.e. its verifiable consequences are 
never found to be false. Epistemologically, physics might 
be expected to collapse if perceptions have no external causes ; 
therefore the matter must be examined before we can go 
further. 

We must first give somewhat more precision to the common- 



198 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 

sense view which is rejected by the causal theory. We have 
to ask what is meant by "external objects.” One would 
naturally say " spatially external.” But " space ” is very 
ambiguous: in visual space, the objects which we see are 
mutually external, and objects other than the visual ap- 
pearances of parts of our own body are spatially external to 
those appearances. In the space derived from the combina- 
tion of touch and sight and bodily movement, which is the 
ordinary space of common sense, there is the same externality 
of visual appearances other than those of parts of our own 
body. Thus spatial externality, in the sense in which space 
can be derived from the relations of our own percepts, is not 
what is meant. I think we shall come nearer to what is meant 
if we say that two people can perceive the same object. In 
some sense, unless we reject testimony, we must of course 
admit that this is true : we can all see the sun unless we are 
blind. But this fact is differently interpreted by common 
sense and by the causal theory : for common sense, the percepts 
are identical when two people see the sun, whereas for the 
causal theory they are only similar and related by a common 
causal origin. 

It would be a waste of time to recapitulate the arguments 
against the common-sense view. They are numerous and 
obvious and generally admitted. The laws of perspective 
may serve as an illustration: where one man sees a circle, 
another sees an ellipse, and so on. These differences are not 
due to anything " mental,” since they appear equally in photo- 
graphs from different points of view. Common sense thus 
becomes involved in contradictions. These do not exist for 
solipsism, but that is a desperate remedy. The alternative is 
the causal theory of perception. 

We must not expect to find a demonstration that perceptions 
have external causes, which may produce perceptions in a 
number of people at the same time. The most that we can 



THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 


199 


hope for is the usual ground for accepting a scientific theory — 
namely, that it links together a number of kn own facts, that 
it does not have any demonstrably false consequences, and 
that it sometimes enables us to make predictions which are 
subsequently verified. All these tests the causal theory 
fulfils; it must not be assumed, however, that no other theory 
could fulfil them. But let us examine the evidence. 

First : there can be no question of logical proof. A certain 
collection of facts is known to me by perception and recol- 
lection ; what else I believe about the physical world is either 
the effect of unreasoning habit or the conclusion of an 
inference. Now there cannot be any logical impossibility in 
a world consisting of just that medley of events which I per- 
ceive or remember, and nothing else. Such a world would be 
fragmentary, absurd, and lawless, but not self-contradictory.* 
I am aware that, according to many philosophers, such a world 
would be self-contradictory. I am aware also that, according 
to other philosophers, what we perceive is not fragmentary, 
but really embraces the whole universe — what is fragmentary 
is only what we perceive that we perceive. The first of these 
views is that of Hegel and his followers ; the second is that of 
Bergson and (perhaps) of Dr Whitehead. The Hegelian view 
rests upon an elaborate logic, which I have controverted on 
former occasions; at present I am content to refer to what I 
have written before . The other view is traditionally associated 
with mysticism ; my reasons for not accepting it are given in 
Mysticism and Logic. I say, therefore, on grounds given in 
former writings, that the world of perception and memory is 
fragmentary, but not self-contradictory. On grounds of logic, 
I hold that nothing existent can imply any other existent 
except a peurt of itself, if implication is taken in the sense of 
what Professor G. I. Lewis calls " strict implication,” which is 

* Perhaps it would not really be lawless; I shall discuss this at a later 
Stage. 



THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 


the relevant sense for our present discussion. If this is true, 
it follows that any selection of the things in the world might 
be absent, so far as self-contradiction is concerned. Given 
a world consisting of particulars x, y, z, .... interrelated in 
various ways, the world which results from the obliteration of 
* must be logically possible. It follows that the world con- 
sisting only of what we perceive and recollect cannot be self- 
contradictory; if, therefore, we are to believe in the existence 
of things which we neither perceive nor recollect, it must be 
either on the ground that we have other non-inferential ways 
of knowing matters of fact, or on the basis of an argument 
which has not the type of cogency that we should demand in 
pure mathematics, in the sense that the conclusion is only 
probable. As for the fragmentary character of the perceived 
world, those who deny it have to introduce minute perceptions, 
like Leibniz, or unconscious perceptions, or vague perceptions, 
or something of the kind. Now it seems to me unnecessary 
to inquire whether there are perceptions of such kinds; I 
certainly am not prepared to deny them dogmatically. But 
I do say that, even if they exist, they are useless as a basis for 
physics. Perceptions of which we are not sufficiently conscious 
to express them in words are scientifically negligible as data ; 
our premisses must be facts which we have explicitly noted. 
Vagueness, no doubt, is onmipresent and rmavoidable; but 
it is only in proportion as we overcome it that exact science 
becomes possible. And we overcome it most by analysis 
and concentration, not by a diffused ecstatic mystical vision. 

I return now to the question: What grounds have we for 
inferring that our percepts and what we recollect do not con- 
stitute the entire universe ? I believe that at bottom om: 
main ground is the desire to believe in simple causal laws. 
But proximately there are other arguments. When we speak 
to people, they behave more or less as we should if we heard 
such words, not as we do when we speak them. When I say 



THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 201 

that they behave in a similar manner, I mean that our per- 
ceptions of their bodies change in the same sort of way as our 
perceptions of our own bodies would in correlative circum- 
stances. When an officer who has risen from the ranks gives 
the word of command, he sees his men doing what he used to 
do when he heard the same sounds as a private ; it is therefore 
natural to suppose that they have heard the word of command. 
One may see a crowd of jackdaws in a newly-ploughed field 
all fly away at the moment when one hears a shot; again it is 
natural to suppose that the jackdaws heard the shot. Again: 
reading a book is a very different experience from composing 
one; yet, if I were a solipsist, I should have to suppose that I 
had composed the works of Shakespeare and Newton and 
Einstein, since they have entered into my experience. Seeing 
how much better they are than my own books, and how much 
less labour they have cost me, I have been foolish to spend 
so much time composing with the pen rather tham with the 
eye. All this, however, would perhaps be the better for being 
set forth formally. 

First, there is a preliminary labour of regularizing our own 
percepts. I spoke of seeing others do what we should do in 
similar circmnstances ; but the similarity is obvious only as a 
result of interpretation. We cannot see our face (except the 
nose, by squinting) or our head or our back ; but tactually they 
are continuous with what we can see, so that we easily imagine 
what a movement of an invisible part of our body ought to 
look like. When we see another person frowning, we can 
imitate him ; and I do not think the habit of seeing ourselves 
in the glass is indispensable for this. But probably this is 
explained by imitative impulses — i.e. when we see a bodily 
action, we tend to perform the same action, in virtue of a 
physiological mechanism. This of course is most noticeable 
in children. Thus we first do what someone else has done, 
and then realize that what we have done is what he did. How- , 



THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 


ever, this complication need not be pmrsaed. What I am con- 
cerned with is the passage, by experience, from " apparent ” 
shapes and motions to " real ” shapes and motions. This 
process lies within the perceptual world: it is a process of be- 
coming acquainted with congruent groups — i.e. to speak 
crudely, with groups of visual sensations which correspond to 
similar tactual sensations. All this has to be done before the 
analogy between the acts of others and our own acts becomes 
obvious. But as it lies within the perceptual world, we may 
take it for granted. The whole of it belongs to early infancy. 
As soon as it is completed, there is no difficulty in interpreting 
the analogy between what we perceive of others and what we 
perceive of ourselves. 

The analogy is of two kinds. The simpler kind is when 
others do practically the same thing as we are doing — for 
instance, applaud when the curtain goes down, or say " Oh " 
when a rocket bursts . In such cases, we have a sharp stimxilus , 
followed by a very definite act, and our perception of our own 
act is closely similar to a number of other perceptions which 
we have at the same time. These, moreover, are all associated 
with perceptions very like those which we call perceptions of 
our own bodies. We infer that all the other people have had 
perceptions analogous to that of the stimulus to our own act. 
The analogy is very good; the only question is: Why should 
not the very same event which was the cause of our own act 
have been the cause of the acts of the others ? Why should 
we supp)ose that there had to be a separate seeing of the fall 
of the curtain for each spectator, and not only one seeing which 
caused all the appearances of bodies to appear to applaud ? 
It may be said that this view is far-fetched. But I doubt if it 
would be unreasonable but for the second kind of amalogy, 
which is incapable of a similar explanation. 

In the second kind of analogy, we see others acting as we 
should act in response to a certain kind of stimulus which. 



THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 


203 


however, we are not experiencing at the moment. Suppose, 
for example, that you are a rather short person in a crowd 
watching election returns being exhibited on a screen. You 
hear a burst of cheering, but can see nothing. By great 
efforts, you manage to perceive a very notable result which 
you could not perceive a few moments earlier. It is natural 
to suppose that the others cheered because they saw this result . 
In this case, their perceptions, if they occurred, were certainly 
not identical with yours, since they occurred earlier; hence, 
if the stimulus to their cheering was a perception analogous 
to your subsequent perception, they had perceptions which 
you could not perceive. I have chosen a rather extreme ex- 
ample, but the same kind of thing occurs constantly; some- 
one says “ There’s Jones,” and you look round and see Jones. 
It would seem odd to suppose that the words you heard were 
not caused by a perception analogous to what you had when 
you looked round. Or your friend says " Listen,” and after 
he has said it you hear distant thunder. Such experiences 
lead irresistibly to the conclusion that the percepts you call 
other people are associated with percepts which you do not 
have, but which are like those you would have if you were in 
their place. The same principle is involved in the assumption 
that the words you hear express “ thoughts.” 

The argument in favour of the view that there are percepts, 
connected with other people, which are not among our own 
percepts, is presupposed in the acceptance of testimony, and 
comes first in logical order when we are trying to establish the 
existence of things other than our own percepts, both because 
of its inherent strength, and because of the usefulness of 
testimony in the further stages. The argmnent for other 
people’s percepts seems to conunon sense so obvious and com- 
pelling that it is difficult to make oneself examine it with the 
necessary detachment. Nevertheless it is important to do 
so. As we have seen, there are three stages. The first does 



204 the causal theory of perception 

not take us outside our own percepts, but consists merely in 
the arrangement of them in groups. One group consists of 
all the percepts which common sense believes to be those of 
an identical object by differoit senses and from different 
points of view. When we eliminate reference to an object, a 
group must be constituted by correlations, partly between 
one percept and another (touch and sight when an object is 
held in the hand), partly between one percept and the changes 
in another (bodily movement and changes of visual and tactual 
perceptions while we move). In assuming that these corre- 
lations will hold in untested cases, we are of course using 
induction; otherwise, the whole process is straightforward. 
The process enables us to speak of a “ physical object ” as a 
group of percepts, and to explain what we mean by saying that 
a near object and a distant object are " really ” of the same 
size and shape. Also we can explain what we mean by saying 
that a physical object does not “ really ” change as we walk 
away from it (».<. as we have the percepts which make us say 
we are walking). This is the first stage in the argmnent. 

In the second stage, we note the likeness of the physical 
objects called other people’s bodies to each other and to our 
own body ; we also note the likeness of their behaviour to our 
behaviour. In the case of our own behaviour, we can observe 
a number of correlations between stimulus and reaction (both 
being percepts). For example, we feel himger or thirst, and 
then we eat or drink; we hear a loud noise, and we jump; 
we see Jones, and we say “ Hullo, Jones.” The behaviour of 
the percepts we call other people’s bodies is similar to that 
of our own body in response to this or that stimulus; some- 
times we experience the stimulus, and behave just as others 
do, which is the second stage ; sometimes we do not experience 
the stimulus, but suppose, from their behaviour, that other 
people have experienced it, whidi is the third stage. 'This is 
a particularly plausible supposition if we ourselves experience 



THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 205 

the stimulus in question very shortly after we have observed 
the behaviour which led us to infer it. The third stage is the 
more important, since in the second we might attribute the 
behaviour of others to the stimulhs which we perceive, and thus 
escape inferring unperceived existents, while in the third stage 
this alternative is not open to us. It will be seen that, in 
the third stage, the argument is the usual causal-inductive t5q)e 
of argument upon which all empirical laws are based. We 
perceive A and B conjoined in a number of cases, and we then 
infer A and B in a case in which we do not know by perception 
whether A is present or not. Moreover, the argument for 
other people’s perceptions is the same in form and cogency as 
the argument for the future truth of laws of correlation among 
our own percepts. We have exactly as good reason for be- 
lieving that others perceive what we do not as we have for 
believing that we shall have a perception of touch if we stretch 
out our hand to an object which looks as if it were within 
reach. 

The argument is not demonstrative, either in the one case 
or in the other. A conjuror might make a waxwork man with 
a gramophone inside, and arrange a series of little mishaps of 
which the gramophone would give the audience warning. In 
dreams, people give evidence of being alive which is similar 
in kind to that which they give when we are awake; yet the 
people we see in dreams are supposed to have no external 
existence. Descartes’ malicious demon is a logical possibility. 
For these reasons, we may be mistaken in any given instance. 
But it seems highly improbable that we are always mistaken. 
From the observed correlation of A and B we may argue, as 
regards cases in which B is observed but we do not know 
whether A exists or not, either: (i) A is always present, or 
(2) A is generally present, or (3) A is sometimes present. 
Dreams suffice to show that we caimot assert (1) . But dreams 
could be distinguished from waking life by a solipsist, unless 



206 THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 

his dreams were unusually rational and coherent. We may 
therefore exclude them before beginning our induction. Even 
then, it would be very rash to assert (i). But (2) is more 
probable, and {3) seems extremely probable. Now (3) is 
enough to allow us to infer a proposition of great philosophic 
importance, namely: there are existents which I do not 
perceive. This proposition, therefore, if induction is valid at 
all, may be taken as reasonably certain. And, if so, it increases 
the probability of other propositions which infer the existence 
of this or that unperceived existent. The argument, though 
not demonstrative, is as good as any of the fundamental 
inductions of science. 

We have been considering hitherto, not the external world 
in general, but the percepts of other people. We might say 
that we have been trying to prove that other people are alive, 
and not mere phantoms like the people in dreams. The exact 
thing we have been trying to prove is this: Given an observed 
correlation among our own percepts, in which the second term 
is what one would naturally call a percept of our own bodily 
behaviour, and given a percept of similar behaviour in a 
physical object not our own body but similar to it, we infer 
that this behaviour was preceded by an event analogous to the 
earlier term in the observed correlation among our percepts. 
This inference assumes nothing as to the distinction of mind 
and body or as to the nature of either. 

In virtue of the above argument, I shall now assume that 
we may enlarge our own experience by testimony — i.e. that 
the noises we hear when it seems to us that other people are 
talking do in fact express something analogous to what we 
should be expressing if we made similar noises. This is a 
particular case of the principle contained in the preceding 
paragraph. I think the evidence for other people’s percepts 
is the strongest we have for anything that we do not perceive 
ourselves; therefore it seems right to establish this, so far as we 



THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 207 

can, before proceeding to consider our evidence for " matter ” 
— i.e. for existents satisfying the equations of physics. This 
must be our next task ; but it will be well to begin with common- 
sense material " things ” conceived as the causes of per- 
ceptions. 

Having now admitted the percepts of other people, we can 
greatly enlarge the group constituting one “ physical object.” 
Within the solipsistic world, we foimd means of collecting 
groups of percepts and calling the group one physical object ; 
but we can now enrich our group enormously. A number of 
people sitting near each other can all draw what they see, and 
can compare the resulting pictures; there will be similarities 
and differences. A number of stenographers listening to a 
lecture can all take notes of it, and compare results. A 
number of people can be brought successively into a room full 
of hidden roses, and asked ” What do you smell ?” In this way 
it appears that the world of each person is partly private and 
partly common. In the part which is common, there is found 
to be not identity, but only a greater or less degree of similarity, 
. between the percepts of different people. It is the absence of 
identity which makes us reject the naive realism of common 
sense ; it is the similarity which makes us accept the theory of 
a common origin for similar simultaneous perceptions. 

The argument here is, I think, not so good as the argument 
for other people’s percepts. In that case, we were inferring 
something very similar to what we know in our own experience, 
whereas in this case we are inferring something which can never 
be experienced, and of whose nature we can know no more 
than the inference warrants. Nevertheless, the common-sense 
arguments for an external cause of perception are strong. 

To begin with, we can, without assuming anything that 
no one perceives, establish a common space and time in which 
we all live. (Our discussion is necessarily confined to people 
on the surface of the earth, since other people, if they exist. 



2o8 the causal theory of perception 

have not succeeded in communicating with us; consequently 
the complications of relativity do not yet arise.) The usual 
methods of determining latitude and longitude can be applied, 
without assuming that the readings of clock and sextant have 
the physical meaning usually assigned to them. Altitudes, 
also, can be measured by the usual methods. By these means, 
observers can be arranged in a three-dimensional order. Of 
course the resulting space will not be a continuum, since it 
will contain only so many " points ” as there are observers. 
But the motion of an observer can be sensibly continuous, so 
that we can construct " ideal ” points of view with defined 
mathematical properties, and thus build up, for mathemat- 
ical purposes, a continuous space. We can thus arrive at the 
laws of perspective, taken in a generalized sense ; that is to say, 
we can correlate the differences between correlated perceptions 
with differences in the situations of the percipients. And in 
the space derived from “ points of view ” we can place physical 
objects. For, let A and B be two observers, a and b their 
correlated visual percepts, which, being correlated, are described 
as percepts of one physical object O. If the angular dimensions 
of a are larger than those of b, we shall say (as a definition) 
that A is nearer to 0 than B is. We can thus construct a 
number of routes converging on 0. We shall construct our 
geometry so that they intersect, and shall define their inter- 
section as the place where O is. If 0 happens to be a human 
body, we shall find that the place of 0, so defined, is identical 
with the place of 0 as an observer in the space of points of 
view.* 

The correlation of the times of different percipients offers 
no difficulty, since, as brfore observed, our percipients are all 
on the earth. The usual method of light-signals can be em- 
ployed. But here we come upon one of the arguments for the 
causal theory of perception, as against both common sense 
• On this subject, cf. my Knowledge of the External World, 



THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 


209 


and phenomenalism. (We may define phenomenalism, at 
least for the moment, as the view that there are only percepts.) 
Suppose a gun on a hilltop is fired every day at twelve o’clock: 
many people both see and hear it fired, but the further they are 
from it the longer is the interval between seeing and hearing. 
This makes it very difficult to accept a naively realistic view 
as to the hearing, since, if that view were correct, there would 
have to be a fixed interval of time (presumably zero) between 
the sight and the sound. It also makes it natural to adopt a 
causal view of sound, since the retardation of the sound depends 
upon the distance, not upon the number of intermediate 
percipients. But hitherto our space was purely " ideal ” 
except where there were percipients; it seems odd, therefore, 
that it should have an actual influence. It is much more 
natural to suppose that the sound travels over the intervening 
space, in which case something must be happening even in 
places where there is no one with ears to hear. The argument 
is perhaps not very strong, but we cannot deny that it has 
some force. 

Much stronger arguments, however, are derivable from 
other sources. Suppose a room arranged with a man concealed 
behind a curtain, and also a camera and a dictaphone. Sup- 
pose two men came into the room, converse, dine, and smoke. 
If the record of the dictaphone and the camera agrees with 
that of the man behind the curtain, it is impossible to resist 
the conclusion that something happened where they were 
which bore an intimate relation to what the hidden man per- 
ceived. For that matter, one might have two cameras and 
two dictaphones, and compare their records. Such corre- 
spondences, which are only more extreme forms of those with 
which primitive common sense is familiar, make it incon- 
ceivably complicated and implausible to suppose that nothing 
happens where there is no percipient. If the dictaphone and 
the hidden man give the same report of the conversation, one 



210 


THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 


must suppose some causal connection, since otherwise the 
coincidence is in the highest degree improbable. But the 
causal connection is found to depend upon the position of the 
dictaphone at the time of the conversation, not upon the 
person who hears its record. This seems very strange, if its 
record does not exist until it is heard, as we shall have to 
suppose if we confine the world to percepts. I will not 
emphasize the more obvious oddities of such a world, as, 
e.g., the one once brought forward by Dr G. E. Moore, that a 
railway train would only have wheels when it is not going, 
since, while it is going, the passengers cannot see them. 

Before accepting such arguments, however, we must see 
what could be said against them by a phenomenalist. Let us, 
therefore, proceed to state the case for phenomenalism. 

It may be suggested that our argument is, after all, not so 
strong as it looks, since all the facts can be interpreted by 
means of " ideal ” percipients. The doubt I have in mind is 
suggested by a certain kind of construction, of which a good 
example is the introduction of "ideal” points, lines, and 
planes in descriptive geometry.* For our purposes, " ideal ” 
points will suffice. The process by which they are constructed 
is as follows. Take all the straight lines which pass through 
a given point ; these form a group of lines having other notable 
properties besides that of all possessing a common point. 
These other properties belong also to certain groups of lines 
which have no point in common — e.g. in Euclidean geometry, 
to the group consisting of all lines parallel to a given line. We 
then define a group of lines possessing these properties as an 
" ideal ” point.t Thus some " ideal ” points correspond to 

• See Dr Whitehead’s tract on this subject (Cambridge University 
Pres^. Also Pasch, Neuere Geometrie, l.eipzig, 1882. 

t The definition of an " ideal " point is as follows. Let /, m be any 
two lines in one plane, A any point not in this plane. Then the planes 
Al, Am have a line in common, say n. The class of all such lines as n, 
when A is varied while I and m remain fixed, is the " ideal ” point deter- 
nained by the two lines 1, m. 



THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 


2II 


real points, while others do not. In this way, by proceeding to 
“ ideal ” lines and planes, we arrive at last at a projective 
geometry, in which any two planes have a common line, and 
any two lines in a plane a common point, which immensely 
simplifies the statement of our propositions. 

The analogy with our problem is perhaps closer than might 
be thought. We have, in the first place, real percepts, col- 
lected into groups each of which is defined by the charac- 
teristic that common sense would call all its members percepts 
of one physical object. These real percepts, as we saw, vary 
from one percipient to another in such a way as to allow us to 
construct a space of percipients, and to locate physical objects 
in this space. Let us, for the moment, adopt the view that 
nothing exists except percepts, our own and other people's. 
We shall then observe that the percepts forming a given group 
can always be arranged about a centre in the space of per- 
cipients, and we can fill out the group by interpolating 
*' ideal ” percepts, continuous in quality with actual percepts, 
in regions where there are no actual percipients. (A region of 
space which is “ ideal ” at one moment may be actual at 
another owing to motion of a percipient. The successive 
positions of an observer watching Cleopatra's Needle from a 
passing tram form a sensibly continuous series.) If a number 
of people hear a gun fired, there are differences in the loudness 
and the time of their percepts; we can fill out the actual per- 
cepts by " ideal ” noises varying continuously from one 
actucd one to another. The same can be done with correlated 
visual percepts; also with smells. We will call a group thus 
extended by interpolation and extrapolation a " full ” group; 
its members are partly real, partly ideal. Each group has 
a centre in the space of percipients; this centre is real if 
occupied by a percipient, while otherwise it is ideal. (Our 
space is not assumed to be a smooth geometrical space, and the 
centre may be a finite volume.) As a rule, even when the 



212 


THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 


centre is occupied by a percipient, it nevertheless contains no 
member of the group, not even an ideal member; " the eye 
sees not itself.” A group, that is to say, is hollow: when we 
get sufficiently near to its centre it ceases to have members. 
This is a purely empirical observation. 

A full group which contains any real members will be called 
a " re2il ” group; a group whose members are all ideal will be 
called “ ideal.” It remains to show how we are to define an 
ideal group. 

In addition to the laws correlating percepts forming one 
group — which may be called, in an extended sense, laws of 
perspective — there are also laws as to the manner in which 
percepts succeed one another. These are causal laws in the 
ordinary sense ; they are included in the usual laws of physics. 
When we know a certain number of members of a full group, 
we can infer the others by the laws of perspective ; it is foimd 
that some exist and some do not, but all that do exist are 
members of the calculated full group. In like manner, when 
we are given a sufficient number of full groups, we can calculate 
other full groups at other times. It is found that some of the 
calculated full groups are real, some ideal, but that all real 
groups are included among those calculated. (I am assuming 
an impossible perfection of physics.) Two groups belonging 
to different times may, in virtue of causal relations which we 
shall explain when we come to discuss substance, be connected 
in the way which makes us regard them as successive states 
of one " thing ” or " body.” (The time of a full group, by 
the way, is not exactly the time at which its members occur, 
but slightly earlier than the earliest real member — or much 
earlier, in the case of a star. The time of a full group is the 
time at which physics places the occurrence supposed to be 
perceived.) The whole series of groups belonging to a given 
” thing ” is called a " biography." The causal laws are such 
as to allow us sometimes to infer " things.” A thing is " real ” 



THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 213 

when its biography contains at least one group which is 
“ real,” i.e. contains at least one percept; otherwise a thing 
is ” ideal.” This construction is closely analogous to that 
of “ ideal ” points, lines, and planes in descriptive geometry. 
We have to ask ourselves whether there are any reasons for or 
against it. 

The above construction preserves the whole of physics, at 
least formally; and it gives an interpretation, in terms of 
percepts and their laws, to every proposition of physics which 
there is any empirical reason to believe. ” Ideal " percepts, 
groups, and things, in this theory, are really a shorthand for 
stating the laws of actual percepts, and all empirical evidence 
has to do with actual percepts. The above account, there- 
fore, preserves the truth of physics with the bare minimum of 
hypothesis. Of course there should be also rules for deter- 
mining when a calculated percept is real and when it is ideal; 
but this is dif&cult, since such rules would have to contain a 
science of human actions. It may be known that you will see 
certain things if you look through a telescope, but it is difficult 
to know whether you will look through it. This completion 
of our science is therefore not possible at present ; but that is 
no argument against the truth of our science so far as it goes. 
It is obvious that the method might be extended so as to make 
all perceptions except one’s own ” ideal ” ; we should then have 
a completely solipsistic interpretation of physics. I shall, 
however, ignore this extension, and consider only that form 
of the theory in which all percepts are admitted. 

The metaphysic which we have been developing is es- 
sentially Berkeley’s; whatever is, is perceived. But om 
reasons are somewhat different from his. We do not suggest 
that there is any impossibility about unperceived existents, 
but only that no strong ground exists for believing in them. 
Berkeley believed that the groimds against them were con- 
clusive; we only suggest that the grounds in their favour are 



214 the causal theory of perception 

inconclusive. I am not asserting this: I am proposing it as 
a view to be considered. 

The great difi&culty in the above theory of " ideal ” elements 
is that it is hard to see how anything merely imaginary can be 
essential to the statement of a causal law. We have to explain 
the dictaphone which repeats the conversation. We will 
suppose that it was seen in place before and after the con- 
versation, but not during it. Consequently, on the view we 
are examining, it did not exist at all during the conversation. 
Causal laws, stated without fictitious elements, will thus involve 
action at a distance in time and space. Moreover, our percepts 
are not sufl&cient to determine the course of nature ; we derive 
causal laws from close observation, and preserve them in other 
cases by inventing “ ideal ” things. This would not be 
necessary if percepts sufficed for the causal determination of 
future percepts. Thus the view we are examining is incom- 
patible with physical determinism, in fact though not in form. 
We could multiply difficulties of this kind indefinitely. No 
one of them is conclusive, but in the aggregate they suffice to 
account for the fact that it is almost impossible to compel 
oneself to believe such a theory. Perhaps continuity (not in 
a strict mathematical sense) is one of the strongest objections. 
We experience sensible continuity when we move our own 
body, and when we fixedly observe some object which does 
not explode. But if we repeatedly open and shut our eyes we 
experience visual discontinuity, which we find it impossible 
to attribute to the physical objects which we alternately see 
and do not see, the more so as, to another spectator, they remain 
unchanged all the time. Causation at a distance in time, 
though not logically impossible, is also repugnant to our 
notions of the physical world. Therefore, although it is 
logically possible to interpret the physical world in terms of 
ideal elements, I conclude that this interpretation is un> 
plausible, and that it has no positive grounds in its favour. 



THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 


Nevertheless the above construction remains vahd and 
important, as a method of separating perceptual and non- 
perceptual elements of physics, and of showing how much 
can be achieved by the former alone. As such, I shall con- 
tinue to utilize it in the sequel. The only thing rejected is the 
view that " ideal ” elements are unreal.* 

The matter would, of course, be otherwise in this last respect 
if we could accept the argument for idealism, whether of the 
Berkeleyan or the German variety. These arguments profess 
to prove that what exists must have a mental character, and 
therefore compel us to interpret physics accordingly. I reject 
such a priori argumentation, whatever conclusion it may be 
designed to prove. There is no difficulty in interpreting 
physics idealistically, but there is also, I should say, no neces- 
sity for such an interpretation. “ Matter,” I shall contend, 
is known only as regards certain very abstract characteristics, 
which might quite well belong to a manifold of mental events, 
but might also belong to a different manifold. In fact, the 
only manifolds known for certain to possess the mathematical 
properties of the physical world are built up out of numbers, 
and belong to pure mathematics. Our reason for not regarding 
” matter ” as actually being an arithmetical structure derived 
from the finite integers is the connection of “ matter ” with 
perception; that is why our present discussion is necessary. 
But this connection, as I shall try to show, tells us extremely 
little about the character of the imperceived events in the 
physical world. Unlike idealists and materialists, I do not 
believe that there is any other source of knowledge from which 
this meagre result can be supplemented. Like other people, 

I allow myself to speculate; but that is an exercise of imagina- 
tion, not a process of demonstrative reasoning. 

I shall assume henceforth not only that there are percepts 

• The character of the " ideal” elements, also, will be less similar 
to that of percepts than in the above construction, j}r at least cannot 
be known to be so similar. 



2i6 


THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 


which I do not perceive, connected with other people’s bodies, 
but also that there are events causally connected with per- 
cepts, as to which we do not know whether they are perceived 
or not. I shall assume, e.g., that if I am alone in a room and 
I shut my eyes, the objects in it which I no longer see (t.e. the 
causes of my visual percepts) continue to exist, and do not 
suddenly become resurrected when I re-open my eyes. This 
must be taken in conjunction with what was said earlier about 
perspective in a generalized sense, and about the common space 
in which we locate the physical objects which, for common 
sense, are perceived by several people at once. We collect 
correlated percepts into a group, and we suppose that there 
are other members of the group, corresponding to places where 
there is no percipient — or, to speak more guardedly, where 
there is not known to be a percipient. But we no longer 
assume, as when we were constructing " ideal ” elements, that 
what is at such places is what we should perceive if we went 
to them. We think, e.g., that light consists of waves of a 
certain kind, but becomes transformed, on contact with the 
eye, into a different physical process. Therefore what occurs 
before the light reaches an eye is presumably different from 
what occurs afterwards, and therefore different from a visual 
percept. But it is supposed to be causally continuous with 
the visual percept ; and it is largely for the sake of this causal 
continuity that a certain reinterpretation of the physical world 
seems desirable. 

In some ways, the language of causation is perhaps not the 
best for expressing what is intended. What is intended may 
be expressed as follows. Confining ourselves, to begin with, 
to the percepts of various observers, we can form groups of 
percepts connected approximately, though not exactly, by 
laws which may be called laws of " perspective." By means 
of these laws, together with the changes in our other percepts 
which are connected with the perception of bodily movement, 



THE CAUSAL THEORY OF PERCEPTION 217 

we can form the conception of a space in which percipients 
are situated, and we find that in this space all the percepts 
belonging to one group {i.e. of the same physical object, from 
the standpoint of common sense) can be ordered about a 
centre, which we take to be the place where the physical object 
in question is. (For us, this is a definition of the place of a 
physical object.) The centre is not to be conceived as a point, 
but as a volume, which may be as small as an electron or as 
large as a star. The essential assumption for what is com- 
monly called the causal theory is, that the group of percepts 
can be enlarged by the addition of other events, ranged in 
the same space about the same centre, and connected both 
with each other and with the group of percepts by laws which 
include the laws of perspective. The essential points are 
(i) the arrangement about a centre, (2) the continuity between 
percepts and correlated events in other parts of the space 
derived from percepts and locomotion. The first is a matter 
of observation ; the second is a hypothesis designed to secure 
simplicity and continuity in the laws of correlation suggested 
by the grouping of percepts. It cannot be demonstrated, 
but its merits are of the same kind as those of any other 
scientific theory, and I shall therefore henceforth assume it. 



CHAPTER XXI 

PERCEPTION AND OBJECTIVITY 
When a number of people are, from the standpoint of common 
sense, observing the same object, there are both likenesses 
and difierences among their percepts. For common sense, 
with its naive realism, the differences constitute a difficulty, 
since they render the percepts mutually inconsistent if taken 
to be each wholly a revelation of one and the same physical 
object. But to the causal theory of perception this difficulty 
is non-existent. We have now, however, an opposite diffi- 
culty — ^namely, that of deciding what elements in a percept 
can be used for inference as to the existence of something other 
than itself, and as to the nature of the inferences when they 
can be drawn. For the moment, I am not thinking of infer- 
ences involving motion, but only of inferences as to the present 
state of the physical object which is being observed. 

We must be on our guard against a confusion which is 
difficult to avoid in such inquiries. Perception, as an event 
in oin own history, is a recognizable occurrence ; its psycho- 
ogical meaning is fairly definite. But it hcis also an episte- 
mological meaning, and this is hardly capable of being made 
as definite as could be wished. Perception is interesting to us, 
in our present discussion, because it is a source of knowledge, 
not because it is an occurrence which a psychologist can 
recognize. So long as naive realism remained tenable, per- 
ception was knowledge of a physical object, obtained through 
the senses, not by inference. But in accepting the causal 
theory of perception we have committed omselves to the view 
that perception gives no immediate knowledge of a physical 
object, but at best a datum for inference. A perception does, 

2l8 



PERCEPTION AND OBJECTIVITY 219 

however, still give knowledge of something: if I perceive a 
round red patch, I know that there is a rotmd red patch in the 
world now, and no account of the causes of my perception 
can destroy this knowledge. It may be conceded that, in 
saying this, I aun using “ perception ” more narrowly than it 
might be used in psychology: I am confining it to cases where 
we notice explicitly what we are perceiving. For epistemo- 
logical purposes, this restriction is essential. I am deliberately 
refraining from all analysis of “ knowing,” since that would 
take us too far from our subject. 

The inferences to be primarily drawn from a perception are 
as to other members of the group to which the percept con- 
cerned belongs. This is done, in a confused way, by common 
sense, when it infers the “ real ” size or shape of an object from 
its “ apparent ” size or shape, i.e. from the real size or shape 
of the percept. The ” real ” size or shape is a norm, from 
which the percept of a spectator in a given relative situation 
can be inferred. Ordinarily, there is no conscious inference 
involved ; but conscious inference can be used without invoking 
any fresh knowledge. For example, an architect can show 
the view of a proposed house from any angle when he knows 
its measurements, and for this purpose he uses only systema- 
tized common sense; and he can infer the measurements 
approximately when he has viewed an actual house from 
several angles. The “ real ” object, as opposed to its " ap- 
pearances,” is thus something of the natme of a formula by 
means of which all sufi&ciently ne«ir “ appearances ” can be 
determined. Given the measurements of a house, we can 
infer its apparent shape at a given distance in a given direction. 
If perception were perfectly accurate and regular, a few per- 
cepts belonging to a given group would enable us to determine 
all percepts, actual and possible, belonging to that group. 

This is found to be not in fact the case. From seeing a drop 
of water with the naked eye, we cannot know that under the 



PERCEPTION AND OBJECTIVITY 


microscope it will be fotind to be full of bacilli. When we 
see a man a hundred yards away, we cannot tell whether he 
is handsome or plain. When we can only just distinguish a 
person’s voice, we cannot teU what is being said. These are 
all cases of “ vagueness.” in a certain perfectly precise sense. 
In any group of percepts, those nearer the centre have a many- 
one relation to those farther off — i.e. two things which look 
alike from a distance look different when seen close to. In 
this sense, the more distant percepts are vaguer than the 
nearer ones : the former can be inferred from the latter, but not 
the latter from the former. 

There is, however, a converse fact — namely, that what may 
be called the “ regular " law for inferring distant from near 
appearances may be interfered with by intervening things. 
The sun may be visible from a great altitude when clouds 
make it invisible from the earth’s surface. Sounds may be 
stopped by obstacles, and die away completely at a sufficient 
distance from their source. Smells die away still more 
quickly, £md are even more dependent upon the wind. This 
set of facts interferes with the inference from near to distant 
appearances, just as the former set interfered with the inference 
from distant to near appearances. 

There is, however, an important difference between the two 
sets of facts. The increasing vagueness of distant appearances 
is an intrinsic law of groups of percepts, whereas the irncer- 
tainty as to distant appearances when near appearances are 
given depends always upon outside interference. This dis- 
tinction is of a kind which we shall find to be very important 
in various ways. Let us try to state it clearly in the case in 
question. 

Suppose two persons to be both observing a given object 
which is stationary on the earth's surface, and suppose that 
one of the persons remains at rest while the other moves about. 
We will suppose that to the person who remains at rest there 



PERCEPTION AND OBJECTIVITY 


is no perceptible change in the object throughout the time con- 
cerned. To the other person there will be changes which, in 
general, are approximately according to the laws of perspective, 
especially for small changes in the observer’s position. But 
sometimes, to take the most obvious example, the object in 
question becomes invisible when the observer takes up certain 
positions — those, namely, from which some opaque object is 
between the observer and the object which he had been seeing. 
As a rule, this happens gradually: at first both objects are 
visible, gradually their angular distance becomes less, and at 
last only the nearer object remains visible. The nearer object 
has thus had an effect upon the appearance of the farther 
object. Fog, smoke, glass, blue spectacles, etc., similarly 
modify the appearances of distant objects. That is to say, 
in calculating the appearance which a body will present in 
such and such a place, we have to take account, not only of 
the body’s appearances elsewhere, but also of the bodies be- 
tween it and the place in question. These intervening bodies 
are sometimes sensible, sometimes not; when they are not, 
they are inferred as being necessary in order to preserve the 
laws which have been found to hold when they were sensible. 
The principle is the following: If we compare neighbouring 
members of a group of percepts, we find, in a great many 
cases, that their first-order differences are in accordance with 
the laws of perspective, while their second-order differences 
are functions of groups with other centres; or rather, since 
the above statement is too precise for the facts, we may say 
simply that the differences between neighbouring positions are 
compounded of the laws of perspective together with ftmctions 
of groups with other centres. Suppose, c.g., that you are 
seeing an object through glass which is slightly distorting. 
The glass is a tactual group between you and the object ; as 
you move, the distortions due to the glass change, and have 
to be compounded with the laws of perspective in order to 



222 PERCEPTION AND OBJECTIVITY 

calculate one member of a group from another. In other cases, 
by carefully comparing a number of members of a group, we 
can discover that their departure from perspective laws pro- 
ceeds according to a law which is a function of a position not 
perceptibly occupied. The previous illustration will apply to 
this case also, if we have not touched the distorting glass. 
Human beings are superior to birds and insects in the fact 
that they can infer glass in such cases, without any scientific 
apparatus, whereas birds and insects repeatedly bump into it. 

Like much of what has to be said in the transition from 
perception to science, the above statement is not capable of 
being made in an exact form. The methods by which we 
collect a number of percepts into one group are rough and 
ready, and become impossible if there is very great distortion 
by the intervening medium. But these methods are successful 
in a sufficient number of cases to give rise to the notion of 
events grouped about a centre, changing partly in accordance 
with the laws of perspective and partly in ways which are 
functions of groups with other centres. Having arrived at this 
notion, it is not very difficult to modify it in such a way that 
it shall become capable of scientific precision. 

I come now to the question of " objectivity ” in a perception. 
This is a matter of degree : the more correct are the inferences 
we can draw from a percept as to other events (whether per- 
cepts or not) belonging to the same group, the more " objec- 
tive ” is the perception. (I propose this as a definition.) A 
percept may not belong to a group at all; in that case it has 
no objectivity. Hallucinations and dreams come under this 
head. Or we may be mistaken as to the position of the centre 
of the group; this is the case with a mirage, or with a reflection 
not recognized as such. Or we may perceive a colour or shape 
which is erratic, say owing to intervening smoke, and thus 
misleads us as to the colour or shape which others will see. I 
should not regard a perception as failing in objectivity through 



PERCEPTION AND OBJECTIVITY 223 

mere vagueness. Vagueness diminishes the number of in- 
ferences that we can draw, but not their correctness. From 
a distance we perceive correctly that what is approaching is 
a man; when he gets near we perceive that he is Jones. But 
our previous perception did not fail in objectivity through 
failing to show that it was Jones. It would have failed of 
objectivity if, owing to intervening lenses, it had shown us 
a man standing on his head. 

When two people simultaneously have percepts which they 
regard as belonging to one group, if the inferences of the one 
differ from those of the other, one of them at least must be 
drawing false inferences, and must therefore have an element 
of subjectivity in his perception. It is only where the in- 
ferences of the two observers agree that both perceptions may 
be objective. It will be seen that, according to this view, the 
objectivity of a perception does not depend only upon what 
it is in itself, but also upon the experience of the percipient. 
A man accustomed to being short-sighted can judge objects 
much more correctly than a man whose vision suddenly ac- 
quires the same defect. Fatigue as well as alcohol may make 
us see double, but fatigue will not deceive us when it does so. 

Subjectivity in perceptions may be traced to three sources, 
physical, physiological, and psychological; or, better perhaps, 
physical, sensory, and cerebral. In all cases in which a per- 
cept is really a member of a group constituting a physical 
object, any element of subjectivity that it may possess is due 
to the distortions connected with intervening physical objects 
— that, at least, is the theory which has been found successful. 
When these objects are between the body of the percipient 
and the centre of the group to which the percept belongs, the 
subjectivity is physical; when they are in the body of the 
percipient but not in his brain, they are sensory; when they are 
in his brain, they are cerebral. The last of these, however, is 
usually purely hypothetical; the discoverable causes of the 



224 PERCEPTION AND OBJECTIVITY 

subjectivity which we are calling cerebral are as a rule psycho- 
logical. 

Physical subjectivity exists equally in a photograph or 
gramophone record; it is present already in the events, 
external to the jiercipient’s body, which belong to the group 
in question and are very near to the sense-organ concerned in 
the perception. The stick that looks bent when it is half in 
water is an obvious example of physical subjectivity. So are 
many efiects of reflexion, refraction, etc. The theory of 
relativity has brought to light a new kind of physical sub- 
jectivity, dependent upon relative motion. The prevention 
of mistaken inferences owing to physical subjectivity is part 
of the business of physics, and does not involve physiology or 
psychology. 

Physiological (or sensory) subjectivity arises through defects 
of the sense-organs or afferent nerves; it may also be produced 
by drugs. We can discover such defects by the comparison 
of different people’s perceptions in a given situation. It 
should be observed that the intrinsic quality of a percept is 
unimportant in this respect; if one person sees red where 
another sees green, and green where another sees red, the fact 
will be undiscoverable and harmless. But if, where one person 
sees two colours, red and green, another only sees one, we 
have a discoverable difference, which is correctly described 
as a defect in the vision of the person who only sees one. It 
is always assumed that if two stimuli produce noticeably 
different effects in a given percipient at a given time, there 
must be differences in the stimuli correlated with the differences 
in their effects; while if the effects are not noticeably 
different, there may nevertheless be differences in the stimuli. 
Consequently A’s senses are better than B’s if A perceives 
differences when B does not. For the same reason, the 
microscope and the telescope are better than the naked eye. 
But this has. as a rule, more to do with vagueness than with 



PERCEPTION AND OBJECTIVITY 225 

subjectivity. Subjectivity only enters in when we are led 
to make false inferences, not when we are merely unable to 
make inferences which another can make. A mere deficiency, 
such as blindness or deafness, does not amount to subjectivity, 
but seeing double does if it deceives us. It deceives us when it 
leads to false inferences — e.g. that there are two tactual 
objects, or that a person near us will see two objects. 

Cerebral (or psychological) subjectivity arises as a result 
of past experience. An obvious example is a sensation which 
appears to be in a leg which has been amputated. We are 
liable to this kind of error whenever two things usually as- 
sociated are for some reason dissociated. Certain sensations 
have, in the past, been generally associated with a stimulus 
in the leg; but they have had as intermediaries conditions of 
the nerves between the leg and the brain. If these previously 
intermediate conditions arise in a person who has lost his leg, 
he will interpret them as sensations in his leg, if he has momen- 
tarily forgotten that he has lost his leg — e.g. on waking from 
sleep. In all perception (except perhaps during the first weeks 
of life) there is a large element of interpretation due to past 
experience, and this element is subjective when the present 
situation does not contain the correlations whose past occur- 
rence has caused the interpretation. 

All these sources of error have to be guarded against if 
perception is not to mislead us. The ways of gu^Lrding against 
them are those suggested by common sense and perfected by 
science; they are all such as to substitute laws with few or no 
exceptions for laws with a comparatively large number of 
exceptions. 

It will be seen that very little can be inferred with con- 
fidence from a single percept; we need observation from 
different points of view, and throughout a certain period 
of time. It is true that we shall usually be right in what we 
infer from a single percept, but that is because the objects 



326 PERCEPTION AND OBJECTIVITY 

that surround us mostly belong to familiar kinds — ^men, 
hcM^es, motor-cars, etc. But it would not be difficult to con- 
struct situations which would deceive at the first glance, 
especially if we could be suddenly transported into a quite 
imfamiliar world, like Wells’s Martians. Water, for example, 
would completely puzzle a person who had never seen a 
liquid, if such a person could exist. In this matter, as else- 
where, we proceed step by step from the easy but precarious 
inferences of common sense to the difficult but more reliable 
inferences of science. 

Where the intervening medium is relevant in inferring 
other members of a group from a percept, it is obvious that 
the single percept is theoretically inadequate as a basis for 
inference, since, by a change in the medium, the same percept 
might be associated with a different group. In this case, the 
distorting element in the medium may be directly discovered 
by other percepts — e.g. glass may be touched — or it may be 
merely inferred by examining the way in which percepts be- 
longing to one group change from place to place — e.g. refraction 
in air. When it has been inferred, the inference needs to be 
tested by examining whether it has further consequences which 
can be verified. All this is a commonplace. 

It remains to say something about the inference from per- 
cepts to events which no one perceives. It is not its validity 
that I wish to examine now, but its scope — ».«. how much we 
can know about rmperceived events, assuming the causal 
theory of perception. It is sometimes urged that an unper- 
ceived cause of a perception must be a mere Ding-an-sich or 
Spencerian Unknowable. This seems to me only very 
partially true, if we accept the usual canons of scientific 
info'ence. We assume that differences in percepts imply 
differences in stimuli — i.e. if a person hears two sotmds at 
once, or sees two colours at once, two physically different 
stimuli have reached his ear or his eye. This principle, 



PERCEPTION AND OBJECTIVITY 227 

together with spatio-temporal continuity, suffices to give a 
great deal of knowledge as to the structure of stimuli. Their 
intrinsic characters, it is true, must remain unknown ; but we 
may assume that the stimuli causing us to hear notes of 
different pitches form a series in respect of some character 
which corresponds causally with pitch, and we may make 
similar assumptions in regard to colour or any other character 
of sensations which is capable of serial arrangement. And we 
can •without difficulty extend geometry to the world outside 
our perceptions, although the space of that world will only 
correspond to the space of perception in certain respects, and 
will be by no means identical with the space of perception. 

What we assume is, formally, something like this; there is 
a roughly one-one relation between stimulus and percept — i.e. 
between the events just outside the sense-organ and the event 
which we call a perception. This enables us to infer certain 
mathematical properties of the stimulus when we know the 
percept, and conversely enables us to infer the percept when 
we know these mathematical properties of the stimulus. 
Consequently, except when we are studying physiology or 
psychology, we may suppose that what is happening in a place 
is what a person would perceive in that place, provided we 
use, in inference, only those properties of the percept which 
it shares with the stimulus. E.g. we must not use the blue- 
ness of blue, but we may use its difierence from red or yellow. 
We cannot argue that because a picture looks beautiful, 
therefore there is beauty in the system of stimuli, because 
beauty may depend upon the actual qualities.* But nothing 
in physical science ever depends upon the actual qualities. 
Hence for practical purposes in physics the difference between 
percept and stimulus only compels us to confine ourselves to 
the structural properties of percepts; so long as we do this, 

* If we accepted the theory that beauty depends only upon " signifi- 
cant form," we should have to say that a musical score is as beautiful 
as the music which it represents. 



PERCEPTIOK AND OBJECTIVITY 


we need hardly trouble to remember that percept and stimulus 
are different. In physiology and psychology this does not 
hold, since we are concerned with the process intervening 
between stimulus and perception, or with perception itself. 

Even in physics, it does not hold strictly, because the 
relation of stimulus and perception is not strictly one-one. It 
is only approximately so, even when we confine ourselves to 
stimuli to a given sense of a given person at a given time — 
e.g. two colours which I perceive side by side. Even here, 
vagueness comes in, so that slightly different stimuli may give 
indistinguishable perceptions. This constitutes an essential 
limitation to our knowledge, enshrined in the notion of 
" probable error.” It can, however, be reduced to a minimum 
by the usual methods and constitutes, therefore, rather a 
practical difficulty than a theoretical problem. 



CHAPTER XXII 
THE BELIEF IN GENERAL LAWS 
Throughout out discussion of perception and the physical 
object, we have assumed the validity of general laws. This is 
always assumed in scientific practice, but the reasons for as- 
suming it are not very clear. Although the subject is not 
one on which it is easy to say anything definite, yet it seems 
necessary to examine it. 

Like other scientific postulates, the belief in general laws 
is rooted in the properties of nervous tissue — ^the same pro- 
perties which make us believe in induction and enable us to 
learn from experience. This origin, of course, affords no 
warrant for the truth of the belief, but equally gives no reason 
against it. Indeed, so far as it goes, it affords a slight pre- 
sumption in favour of the view that a great many events are 
in accordance with general laws, since it shows that animals 
which act in a way which the truth of this belief would render 
rational can survive. I should not wish, however, to lay 
stress upon such an argument. 

When we first begin to think, we find ourselves acting in 
certain ways which seem to succeed, and we set to work to 
rationalize our behaviour. The natural way to do this is to 
say : Things always happen that way. This so often succeeds 
that we acquire the habit of always supposing that there is some 
general law according to which any particular event has 
occurred. This belief has two practical consequences. First, 
when a set of events are all in accordance with some law, we 
expect other similar events to be in accordance with it. 
Secondly, when a set of events appears irregular, we invent 
hypotheses to regularize it. Both procedures are important. 

229 



230 THE BELIEF IN GENERAL LAWS 

The first of these procedures is simply induction. As such, 
it is fundamental, in some form or other, and I propose to say 
no more about it. 

The second is more interesting for oiu- purposes. When an 
induction fails in a surprising way — e.g. when there is an 
eclipse — there are two things which a primitive man may do. 
He may regard the failure as a “ portent,” in no way invalidat- 
ing the general validity of the induction, but showing that there 
is something strange, and probably terrifying, in the special 
circtimstances connected with the astonishing event. Or he 
may look for some general law different from that which has 
hitherto proved adequate, in the hope that the new law may 
account for the exceptional occurrence as well. The latter 
course will seldom be adopted until a high degree of intellectual 
culture has been attained. If the odd event is on a large scale, 
it will be considered superstitiously, and if not, it will be simply 
ignored. Sometimes, however, a general law is found by 
accident, as a result of the careful records inspired by super- 
stition. This evidently happened with the Egyptian priest- 
hood, who learnt to predict eclipses, and probably only then 
ceased to regard them with awe. Gradually, the view that 
there must be some law according to which strange things 
happened became more widespread. Dr Whitehead, in his 
Science and the Modem World* traces the belief in natural laws 
to various sources, such as: Fate in Greek tragedy, the 
supremacy of Roman law, and the rationality of God in 
mediseval theology. In effect, however, he regards the belief 
as having only acquired a firm hold of the scientific mind at 
the renaissance. Everything that he says on this subject is 
so excellent that it is unnecessary to cover the groimd again. 

Although the belief in the universality of natural law was, 
at the time of the renaissance, a bold faith going far in advance 
of the evidence, it has since been so successful that it is now 
* Chap, i., Mpecially p. 3 fi. 



THE BEtlEE GENERAL LAWS 


possible to defend it on inductive grounds. But there is some 
difficulty in deciding what we are to mean by it. I have dealt 
with this subject before,* and shall now consider it only 
briefly. 

The regularities which we first observe, and in which we 
first believe, are of the simple form; " A is always accom- 
panied (or preceded or succeeded) by B." But all such 
regularities are capable of having exceptions, and science soon 
seeks laws of a different kind. We arrive in the end (possibly 
not at the very end) at differential equations. I think that 
these are of two kinds, those expressing persistence, and those 
expressing accelerations (in a generalized sense). The former 
are concealed, more or less, by the assumption of permanent 
substance ; but this is a topic which I shall consider in the next 
chapter. The latter are the ordinary differential equations 
of the second order which occur throughout mathematical 
physics. But in addition to these, in order to produce ob- 
served macroscopic results, there must be statistical laws 
governing quantum changes and radio-active disruptions of 
atoms. I want to inquire whether we are saying anything 
significant in assuming that there are laws governing the 
course of the physical world, or whether any set of percepts 
must be amenable to law by a sufficiently liberal use of 
hypothesis. 

It is by no means clear that the accepted laws of physics 
make certain imaginable series of percepts impossible; still 
less that the mere existence of laws would have this effect. 
Take, e.g. , continuity. Changes which appear sudden (e.g. ex- 
plosions) can be resolved into a nmnber of continuous though 
rapid changes: per contra, situations in which there appears to 
be no change {e.g. a steadily glowing gas) are resolved into a 
number of discontinuous changes. Thus we can neither 
infer the absence of physical continuity from the absence of 
• Cf. " On the Notion of Cause,” in Mysticism and Logic. 



434 THE BELIEF IN GENERAL LAWS 

continuity in percepts, nor the presence of physical continuity 
from the presence of continuity in percepts. Again : if percepts 
change in unexpected ways, we infer tmperceived matter ; and 
by a sufficient amount of unperceived matter almost any series 
of percepts could be explained. Of course a particular law is 
strengthened when it enables us to predict percepts, but this 
belongs to the arguments in favour of such-and-such laws, not 
to the arguments in favour of laws in general. We can have 
evidence in favour of such-and-such a law without having 
evidence for laws in general. But here we must make some 
distinctions. Evidence in favour of a particular law is 
evidence that a certain class of phenomena are subject to a 
rule which we have succeeded in discovering. If so, they are 
sure to be also subject to other rules sensibly indistinguishable 
from the one for which we have evidence; but these will in 
general be more complicated than the rule which we adopt. 
Complication may be of two kinds: it may be in the formula, 
or in the amoimt of hypothetical matter needed to make the 
rule work. The great merit of Newtonian gravitation was 
that it was simple in both respects. But clearly any set of 
observations on planetary motions could have been fitted into 
the Newtonian formula by postulating a sufficient number of 
invisible bodies or a sufficient complication in the law of 
attraction. For any given set of observations, there would 
have been many such possible methods of bringing harmony 
between observation and theory; most of these would not 
have been compatible with a fresh set of observations, but 
some of them would have been, given sufficient mathematical 
ingenuity. What is remarkable, therefore, is not the reign 
of law, but the reign of simple laws. If the transfer of energy 
were subject to laws as complicated as those governing the 
transfer of English land, we should never succeed in dis- 
covering them: there would always remain a number of 
possible codes, all of which would fit all known relevant facts. 



THE BELIEF IN GENERAL LAWS 233 

The principle of induction, as practically employed, is the 
principle that the simplest law which fits the known facts will 
also fit the facts to be discovered hereafter. This principle, 
in all its naked simplicity, has come to the fore in Einstein’s 
theory of gravitation, which consists in taking the simplest 
available tensor equation in preference to the others that are 
mathematically possible. 

It may be said that the principle of simple laws is purely 
heuristic, and of course this is true to a considerable extent. 
No sensible mathematician would test a compbcated formula 
before testing a simple one. But the remarkable thing is 
that the simple formula so often turns out right. From the 
trend of physics, it seems as though complication were geo- 
graphical rather than legal. Organic compounds have an 
inunensely complicated structure, but there is no reason to 
suppose that their fundamental laws are other than those 
which govern the hydrogen atom. Professor J. B. Haldane, 
it is true, thinks otherwise, and so do all varieties of vitalists. 
But, to a layman, their arguments seem inconclusive, and 
they are rejected by many competent authorities. It is there- 
fore at least a tenable h5qK)thesis that all matter is governed 
by very simple laws. This is so remarkable that it almost 
suggests some relation to Mr Ke)mes’s " principle of limitation 
of variety,” and seems to confirm his hint that Nature may 
be really like the um containing white and black balls which 
plays such a prominent part in the theory of probability. 
Some Mendelians would meike ns think of human beings in this 
way. Suppose there were a hundred pairs of characters, 
a, a', b, b' , c, c', etc., such that every human being possessed 
by inheritance one but not both of the characters in each pair. 
This would make the number of differing human embryos 2*®* 
— i.e. about 10**. If this is thought too few, we can take more 
pairs of characters. Views of this sort cannot be rejected out 
of hand, and they are strongly suggested by the success of 



234 the belief in GENERAL LAWS 

induction and the prevalence of simple laws. Let us, therefore, 
ask once more: What evidence is there that simple laws pre- 
vail, and how much reason have we to be surprised by the 
degree of their prevalence ? 

As I have pointed out on a former occasion, it would be 
fadlacious to argue inductively from the simplicity of the laws 
we have discovered to the probable simplicity of undiscovered 
laws. For, if some laws are simple and some complicated, 
we are likely to discover the simple laws first. We have to 
proceed more cautiously. First, is it surprising that there are 
any simple laws ? Secondly, have we any ground for believing, 
as was suggested just now, that all phenomena are governed 
by simple laws ? 

Simplicity is best established at the two opposite extremes 
of size: astronomy and the atom. The latter, however, is 
much more significant for our inquiry, since the simplicity of 
astronomy may result from averaging. As we saw in Part I., 
the theory of the atom amounts, broadly, to this: An atom 
is composed of electrons and protons, the latter being all in 
the nucleus, the former partly in the nucleus (except in hydro- 
gen), partly planetary. The number of protons in the nucleus 
gives the atomic weight ; the excess of the number of protons 
over that of electrons in the nucleus gives the atomic number. 
When the atom is imelectrified, the number of planetary 
electrons is equal to the atomic number. If the quantum 
theory is correct, an atom has a certain number of characters, 
each measured by integers called quantum numbers, which are 
always small. It has also a property called energy, which is 
a function of the quantum numbers; and in connection with 
each of the quantum munbers there is a periodic process which 
is subject to quantum rules. Each quantum number is 
capable of changing suddenly from one integer to another. 
When the atom is left to itself, these changes will only be such 
as to dimini^ the energy, but when it is receiving energy from 



THE BELIEF IN GENERAL LAWS 235 

elsewhere the changes may increase the energy. All this, 
however, is more or less hypothetical. What we really know 
about is the interchange of energy between the atom and the 
surrounding space; here there are simple laws as to the form 
the radiamt energy will take. But there are at present no 
laws determining when quantum changes will take place in 
the atom, though the changes that are possible are a definite 
known set. 

As we are only considering how far simple laws can account 
for the phenomena, we may accept the view of the atom as 
a miniature solar system, governed, except as to quantum 
changes, by attractions and repulsions among its electrons. 
Nevertheless it remains a fact that the atom only indicates its 
presence when it suffers a quantum change, and that we know 
of no laws determining why, at a given moment, such a change 
takes place in some atoms rather than in others. The laws 
governing the intensity of the light emitted by a gas are 
statistical laws. This suggests a world in which the number 
of possibilities is finite, but the choice among possibilities is 
left purely to chance. We might suppose, as Poincar^ once 
suggested, and as Pythagoras apparently believed, that space 
and time are granular, not continuous — i.e. the distance be- 
tween two electrons may be always an integral multiple of 
some unit, and so may the time between two events in the 
history of one electron. This, together with the fact that the 
number of electrons is finite, would give a finite number of 
possible situations for each electron. And it may be that the 
choice among possible situations is wholly a matter of chance. 
In that case, the apparent regularity of the world will be due 
to the absence of laws. I think it improbable that such a 
view could be developed satisfactorily, but at least we must 
take account of it before we attach undue importance to the 
appearance of law in the world. 

The real objection to a philosophy founded upon such a 



THE BELIEF IN GENERAL LAWS 


*36 

theory of the universe as we have been considering is that, after 
all, we still need statistical laws, which wiU involve a random 
distribution," or something of the kind. Such laws are still 
laws, though they differ from others by seeming a priori 
probable instead of improbable. To this extent, it is a gain 
if we can base science upon them; but it would not be correct 
to say that, in that case, science would have succeeded in 
doing without laws. We could no longer say, however, that 
the laws of science were surprising; on the contrary, we should 
be surprised by their failure. 

There is another question to be considered, and that is as 
to the scope of simple laws. It cannot be pretended that we 
krujw the laws governing the hydrogen atom to be sufhcient 
to account for all that happens to matter, especially to organic 
matter. This is at present merely a h)q)othesis. All science 
uses laws based upon observation, which may or may not be 
deducible by a celestial mathematician from the laws governing 
electrons, but are not likely ever to be deducible by mathema- 
ticians on this planet. And when we come to such matters as 
physiology, the laws are no longer such as to enable us to 
say, with any confidence, just what is going to happen; they 
give tendencies rather than precise mathematical rules. It 
would be rash to maintain that such rules must exist; we 
may do well to look for them, but not well to feel quite certain 
that they are to be found. 

On the whole, the tendency of the foregoing discussion has 
been to suggest that it is easy to exaggerate the evidence for 
simple laws in the physical world. Where we know most — 
i.e. in regard to the structure of the atom — there is, so far as 
we know, a complete absence of law in certain veiy important 
respects. Where we know less, the laws may be purely 
statistical. The amount of law known to exist in the physical 
world is, therefore, less surprising than it seems at first sight, 
and there is no conclusive reason for believing that all natural 



THE BELIEF IN GENERAL LAWS 


237 


occurrences happen in accordance with laws which suffice to 
determine them given a sufficient knowledge of their ante- 
cedents. Science must continue to postulate laws, since it 
is coextensive with the domain of natural law. But it need 
not assume that there are laws everywhere; it need only 
assume, what is evident since it is a tautology, that there are 
laws wherever there is science. 



CHAPTER XXIII 

SUBSTANCE 

The question of substance in the philosophy of physics has 
three branches: logical, physical, and epistemological. The 
first is a problem in pure philosophy: is the notion of " sub- 
stance ” in any sense a " category,” i.e. forced upon us by the 
general nature either of facts or of knowledge ? The second 
is a question of the interpretation of mathematical physics: 
is it (a) necessary or (6) convenient to interpret our formulse 
in terms of permanent entities with changing states and 
relations ? The third concerns the special topics with which 
we are concerned in Part II. — ^namely, the relation of percep- 
tion to the physical world. The first and second problems 
really belong to other portions of the philosophy of matter, 
but I shall discuss them here in order to obtain a unified 
discussion of the problem of substance. 

Logically, " substance ” has played a very important part 
in the past, and is still perhaps less obsolete than might be 
supposed. A substance may be defined in purely logical 
terms as ” that which can only enter into a proposition as 
subject, never as predicate or relation.” This definition is 
practically that of Leibniz, except that he does not mention 
relations, since he held them to be imreal. We shall do well, 
however, to include them, because the logical position of 
substance is not much affected thereby, and it may, I hope, 
be now taken for granted that relations areas “real” aspre. 
dicates. 

Metaphysically, substances have generally been held to be 
indestructible. But this opinion is not justified by the logical 
definition, though many philosophers have supposed that it 
238 



SUBSTANCE 


239 


was. When I wish to discuss a substance having this further 
attribute, I shall speak of it as a “ permanent substance 
when I use the word “ substance ” without qualification, I 
shall mean only substance in the logical sense, leaving the 
question of duration open. 

It is extraordinarily drfficult, in considering substance from 
the point of view of logic, to avoid being unduly influenced by 
the structure of language. All languages commonly known to 
civilized people consist of r.entences which can be analyzed into 
subject and predicate, two subjects and a dyadic relation, 
three subjects and a triadic relation, etc., together with 
relations between such units, expressed by “ or ” or “ if ’’ or 
some analogous word. I do not know whether the same can 
be said of African, Australian, or other uncivilized languages. 
But certainly it can be said of all the languages that philO' 
sophers have known. Logic, as ordinarily conceived, takes 
over this linguistic scheme, and is inclined to attribute meta- 
physical importance to it. We can hardly resist the belief 
that the structure of the sentence reproduces the structure of 
the fact which it asserts, or, in the case of false sentences, of 
the fact which would exist if the assertion were true. This 
belief, natural as it is, seems very unplausible when explicitly 
stated. Nevertheless, I believe that it has some element of 
truth, though it is very hard to disentangle this element. An 
attempt was made by Wittgenstein,* and I have been much 
influenced by his point of view. 

If we admit, as it seems natural to do, that some sentences, 
taken in their usual meaning, correspond to facts, while others 
do not, we must suppose that the structure of sentences is 
related, in some way, to the structure of facts, since other- 
wise such correspondence would be impossible. Moreover, a 
sentence is a physical fact, and may therefore be expected to 
be capable of correspondence with other physical facts. These 
* TracUUits Logtco-PMUtsopkicHS. 



240 


SUBSTANCE 


two arguments come from quite different intellectual regions, 
the one being logical, the other physical. If we were discussing 
an5dJiing other than physics, they would work in opposite 
directions, and tend to show that we cannot understand (at 
least verbally) anything having a structure radically different 
from that of events in space-time. For our purposes, however, 
the two arguments are concurrent. 

Let us, for a moment, consider a sentence as a physical 
occurrence. We must distinguisli between spoken and 
written sentences, since the former are evanescent events 
while the latter are pieces of matter. We must also distinguish 
between a sentence in the sense in which it is imique on each 
occasion when it is uttered or written, and a sentence in the 
sense in which the same sentence occurs at a given place in 
each copy of the same book. E.g. Jeremiah xvii. 9 is a 
sentence in the latter sense; in the former sense, the particular 
series of shapes at that point in my Bible constitute a sentence, 
while those in yours constitute another (similar) sentence. 
The former sense comes first when we are considering a sentence 
as a physical occurrence ; the latter, when we are considering 
it as having “ meaning.” 

A spoken sentence, considered physically, is a series of 
noises from the point of view of the hearer, and a series of 
movements in the mouth and throat from the point of view 
of the speaker. The " meaning ” of the sentence depends 
upon the causes of the spoken words and the effects of the heard 
words.* But for the moment let us ignore “meaning.” Then 
we find that the sentence consists essentially of noises in order : 
the order is as essential as the character of the noises. (In a 
language like Latin, this is not so true of the separate words 
as in a modem language, but it is just as true of the parts of 
words; " Roma ” is a different word from " amor.”) Con- 
sidered as physical occurrences, the words expressing different 
• Cf. Analysis of Mind, chap. x. 



SUBSTANCE 


241 


parts of speech are indistinguishable; nevertheless there are 
relations which are symbolized by relations among words, not 
by words. Consider " Brutus killed Caesar ” and " Caesar killed 
Brutus.” The difference between these two statements is 
indicated, in an unniflected language, not by a word, but by 
a relation among words. Thus a spoken sentence consists of 
certain noises in a certain temporal order. In the sentence, 
we can distinguish terms and relations: the terms are the words 
(or, more strictly, the elementary noises which, in a phonetic 
system, would each be represented by a separate letter), and 
the relations are temporal relations among events. According 
to our definition, the elementary noises composing the sentence 
may count as “ substances,” in spite of the fact that they are 
evanescent. 

In the case of written words, the sentence is no longer a 
temporal series of events, bttt a spatial series of material 
structures. It is not essential to a written sentence that its 
parts should stand for sounds: in some languages (e.g. Chinese) 
this is not the case, and there is some reason to think that 
writing developed from pictures, not from the attempt to 
s5Tnbolize speech. We may therefore treat the written 
language as an independent method of conveying meaning. 
It is obvious that its efficacy in this respect depends upon its 
capacity for causing visual perceptions (or tactual perceptions 
in the case of ” Braille ”). Written words, even Chinese 
ideograms, consist essentially of parts with a structure, and 
the structure is essential to the meaning. This is equally 
the case with a sentence, even in Latin. Take “ Caesar amat 
Brutum ’* and " Caesarem amat Brutus.” Here the case- 
endings may be regarded as separate words (which they 
probably were originally), whose position relative to the stem 
“ Brut ” or " Caesar ” indicates the " sense ” of the relation 
asserted. 

The written language depends upon the causal theory of 



244 


SUBSTANCE 


Common sense holds the former view, though its " things ” are 
only quasi-permanent. But science has found means of 
resolving " things *’ into groups of electrons and protons, 
each of which may be quite permanent. As we saw in Part I., 
there are some who think that an electron and a proton can 
annihilate each other, so that even they are not quite per- 
manent. But the question of permanence is not the one 
which most concerns us. The question is : Are electrons and 
protons part of the ultimate stuff of the world, or are they 
groups of events, or causal laws of events ? 

We have already seen that the physical object, as inferred 
from perception, is a group of events arranged about a centre. 
There may be a substance in the centre, but there can be no 
reason to think so, since the group of events will produce 
exactly the same percepts; therefore the substance at the 
centre, if there is one, is irrelevant to science, and belongs to 
the realm of mere abstract possibility. If we can reach the 
same conclusion as regards matter in physics, we have 
diminidied the difficulty involved in building our bridge from 
perception to physics. 

The substitution of space-time for space and time has made 
it much more natiural than formerly to conceive a piece of 
matter as a group of events. Physics starts, nowadays, from 
a four-dimensional manifold of events, not, as formerly, from 
a temporal series of three-dimensional manifolds, connected 
with each other by the conception of matter in motion. In- 
stead of a permanent piece of matter, we have now the con- 
ception of a " world-line,” which is a series of events con- 
nected with each other in a certain way. The parts of one 
light-ray are connected with each other in a manner which 
enables us to consider them as forming, together, one light- 
ray; but we do not conceive a light-ray as a substeince moving 
with the velocity of light. Just the same kind of connection 
may be held to constitute the unity of an electron. We have 



SUBSTANCE 


245 


a series of events connected together by causal laws ; these may 
be taken to be the electron, since anything further is a rash 
inference which is theoretically useless. 

What is peculiar about a string of events which physics 
takes as belonging to one electron is a character which is 
present approximately in the common-sense " thing,” a char- 
acter which I should define as the existence of a first-order 
differential law connecting successive events along a hnear 
route. That is to say, given an event belonging to an electron 
at one place in space-time, there will be other events at certain 
neighbouring regions of space-time, separated from the first 
and from each other by small time-like intervals, such that, 
when the intervals are taken small enough, if a, b, c are three 
such events, and the interval between a and b is equal to that 
between b and c, then the difference between a and b tends 
towards equality with the difference between b and c, in certain 
measurable respects. This is a way of saying that accelera- 
tions are always finite — or, where they are not (as perhaps in 
quantum phenomena), there are other characteristics involved 
which are subject to a condition analogous to finite accelera- 
tion. Let us take first the common-sense " thing.” If I 
watch a moving object, I have a series of percepts which change 
gradually, both as regards position and as regards qualities — 
coloiu, shape, etc. The gradualness of the change is the 
criterion by which I am led to regard the percepts as all 
belonging to one “ thing.” But on a common-sense basis 
there are exceptions, such as explosions. Science deals with 
these as rapid, but not instantaneous, changes, and so 
removes the exceptions. We thus arrive at the conclusion 
that, given an event * at a time t, there will be closely analogous 
events at neighbouring times. We may symbolize this by 
saying that, if there is an event * at time t, there will be, at 
any neighbouring time t +dt. an event: 

x+A{x)it+ftm\ 



246 


SUBSTANCE 


where f^ix) is a continuous function of the time, while /j(*) 
is determined by the second-order differential equations of 
physics. The string of events so connected is called one piece 
of matter. In the case of the sudden changes contemplated 
by the quantum theory, there is still continuity in everything 
except spatial position, and the spatial position undergoes 
a change which is one of a smaU number of possible changes. 
Thus in this case also the new occurrences can be causally 
connected with the old, though the laws of the connection are 
somewhat different from what they are in the usual case. 

Thus the string of events constituting one material unit is 
distinguished from others by the existence of an intrinsic 
causal law, though this law is only differential. A light-wave, 
in this respect, is analogous to a material unit; it differs in 
the fact that it spreads spherically instead of travelling along 
a linear route.* 

It will be seen that, if a piece of matter is a string of events, 
the distinction between motion and other continuous changes 
is not so simple as it seemed. We could form continuous 
series of events which would not all belong to one piece of 
matter; therefore the change from one to another would not 
be a " motion.” A " motion ” is a string of events connected 
with each other according to the laws of motion. This might 
seem like a vicious circle, but in fact it is not. What we assert 
is: Strings of events exist which are connected with each other 
according to the laws of motion ; one such string is called one 
piece of matter, and the transition from one event in the string 
to another is called a motion. This contains as much as can 
be verifiable in physics, since every percept is an event . There 
is no mathematical advantage in asserting more, and to assert 
more is to go beyond the evidence. Therefore it is prudent, 
in physics, to regard an electron as a group of events con- 

* The non-shbstantial character of the electron e 
the Heise. 

IT theory. 



SUBSTANCE 


247 


nected together in a certain way. An electron may be a 
“ thing,” but it is absolutely impossible to obtain any evidence 
for or against this possibility, which is scientifically unim- 
portant, because the group of events has all the requisite 
properties. 

The light thrown on the notion of substance by the con- 
nection between physics and perception, which was the third 
branch of our problem, has already been touched upon. We 
saw in former chapters that the physical object to be inferred 
from perception is a group of events, rather than a single 
“ thing.” Percepts are always events, and common sense is 
rash when it refers them to “things ” with changing states. 
There is therefore every reason, from the standpoint of per- 
ception, to desire an interpretation of physics which dis- 
penses with permanent substance. As we have seen that 
such an interpretation is possible, we shall henceforth adopt it. 

There is, however, a view not uncommon in philosophy, 
and perhaps nearer to common sense than the view which I 
have adopted. This view is, I think, that of Dr Whitehead. 
It holds that the different events which constitute a group — 
whether those which make up a physical object at one time 
or those which make up the history of a physical object — are 
not logically self-subsistent, but eire mere" aspects,” implying 
other aspects in some sense which is not merely causal or 
inductively derived from observed correlations. I consider 
this view impossible on purely logical grounds, and have so 
argued elsewhere. But at the moment I prefer to argue that 
it is empirically useless. Given a group of events, the evidence 
that they are " aspects ” of one " thing ” must be inductive 
evidence derived from perception, and must be exactly the 
same as the evidence upon which we have relied in collecting 
them into causal groups. The supposed logical implications, 
if they exist, cannot be discovered by logic, but only by ob- 
servation; no one, by mere reasoning, could avoid being 



248 


SUBSTANCE 


deceived by the three-card trick. Moreover, in calling two 
events “ aspects " of one “ thing,” we imply that their like- 
ness is more important than their difference; but for science 
both are facts, and of exactly the same importance. One may 
say that the theory of relativity has grown up by paying 
attention to small differences between " aspects.” I conclude, 
therefore, that the ” thing ” with " aspects ” is as useless as 
permanent substance, and represents an inference which is as 
unwarrantable as it is unnecessary. 



CHAPTER XXIV 

IMPORTANCE OF STRUCTURE IN SCIENTIFIC INFERENCE 
The inference from perception to physics, which we have been 
considering, is one which depends upon certain postulates, 
the chief of which, apart from induction, is the assumption of 
a certain similarity of structure between cause and effect 
where both are complex. I want, in this chapter, to inquire 
more closely into this postulate, not with a view to establishing 
its validity, which I shall take for granted, but with a view to 
discovering what it asserts and what are its consequences. 

The first point is to be clear as to what we mean by structure. 
The notion is not applicable to classes, but only to relations 
or systems of relations. It is fully defined, and made the 
basis of a general kind of arithmetic, in Principia Mathema- 
tica.* But as the later parts of that book are not read, I may 
be excused for repeating, in outline, what is needed for our 
present purposes. 

Two relations P, Q are said to be “ similar ” if there is a 
one-one relation between the terms of their fields, which is such 
that, whenever two terms have the relation P. their correlates 
have the relation Q, and vice versa. The most familiar 
example is that of series: two series are similar when their 
terms can be correlated without change of order. But it would 
be a great mistake to suppose that series are the only im- 
portant application of the notion of similarity between re- 
lations. A map, for example, if accurate, is similar to the 
region which it maps. A book spelt phonetically is similar 
to the sounds produced when it is read aloud. A gramophone 
record is similar to the music which it produces. And so on. 

• Vol. ii., part iv., *150 fi. 

249 



250 STRUCTURE IN SCIENTIFIC INFERENCE 

It should be observed that similarity applies not only to 
two-term relations, but to relations with any number of terms. 
Suppose we have two relations R, R', each M-adic; suppose 
there is a one-one relation S which relates all the terms in the 
field of J? to all the terms in the field of R' ; let x^, * 2 . ... 
be n terms which have the relation R, and let x^', x^, 
be the terms correlated with them by the relation 5. Then 
R and R! are similar if there is a one-one relation S such that, 
when the above conditions are fulfilled, x^^ , x^, ... have 
the relation R' , and conversely. 

Two relations which are similar have the same " structure ” 
or “ relation-number.” The ” relation -number ” of a relation 
is the same as its “ structure,” and is defined as the class of 
all relations similar to the given relation. Relation -numbers 
satisfy all the formal laws of arithmetic which are satisfied by 
transfinite ordinal numbers; ordinal numbers, both finite and 
transfinite, are a particular kind of relation-niunbers — namely, 
the relation-numbers of relations which generate well-ordered 
series. 

The formal laws satisfied by relation-numbers are : 

{a -i- fi) + y= a + (ft + y) 

(axfi)xy = ax(pxy) 

(fi + y) Xa=(^ Xa) -t-(y x a) 

X aT=a^+T 

They do not in general satisfy the commutative law, nor the 
other form of the distributive law, viz. : 

a X (/J -f- y)= (a X ^) + (a X y), nor x py= (a x /?)y. 

Relation-numbers are important for the following reason. 
In addition to the propositions which can be proved by logic 
{considered in Chapter XVIL), there are other propositions 
which can be enunciated by logic, though they cannot be 
proved or disproved except by empirical evidence. Such, for 
example, is the proposition: " There are classes which are not 



STRUCTURE IN SCIENTIFIC INFERENCE 251 

finite.” This is a proposition which is purely logical in 
content, but there is no a priori way of knowing whether it is 
true or false. (Many such have been proposed, but they are 
all fallacious.) Then, again, there are propositions which 
contain some particular constituent, but wotild be capable of 
enunciation in logical terms if that constituent were turned 
into a variable. Take, e.g.\ “ Before is a transitive relation.” 
This is not a statement which pure logic can enunciate, because 
6e/orfi is an empirical relation. But” 2? is a transitive relation,” 
where R is variable, can be enunciated by pure logic. We will 
say that a proposition ^containing a certain constituent a at- 
tributes a " logical property ” to a if, when a is replaced by 
a variable x, the result is a propositional function which can 
be expressed by logic. The test of a logical property is very 
simple: apart from the constant a, there must be no constants 
involved — except such purely formal constants as “ incom- 
patibility ” and “ for all values of *,” which are not con- 
stituents of the propositions in whose verbal or symbolic 
expression they occur. It will be seen that transitiveness, 
e.g., is a logical property of a relation; so is asymmetry or 
symmetry; so is having « terms in its field; so is, in the case 
of a three-term relation {between), the property of generating a 
Euclidean space; so is, in the case of a four- term relation 
[separation of couples), the property of generating a projective 
space ; and so on. We can now state the proposition on account 
of which structure is important. 

When two relations have the same structure (or relation- 
number), all their logical properties are identical. 

Logical properties include all those which can be expressed 
in mathematical terms. Moreover, the inferences from per- 
ceptions to their causes, assiuning such inferences to be valid, 
are concerned mainly, if not exclusively, with logical pro- 
perties. This latter proposition is one which we must now 
examine. 



25* STRUCTURE IN SCIENTIFIC INFERENCE 

Take first the relation between the space of physics and the 
space of perception. Within the private space of one per- 
cipient, there is a distinction between perceived space-relations 
and inferred ones. There is a space into which all the percepts 
of one person fit, but this is a constructed space, the construc- 
tion being achieved during the first months of life. But there 
are also perceived space-relations, most obviously among 
visual percepts. These space-relations are not identical with 
those which physics assumes among the corresponding physical 
objects, but they have a certain kind of correspondence with 
those relations. If we represent the position, for physics, of 
visible objects by pokr co-ordinates, taking the percipient as 
origin, the two angular co-ordinates correspond to perceived 
relations among visual percepts, while the radius vector 
(except possibly for very small distances) is inferred by means 
of causal laws. Let us confine ourselves to the angular co- 
ordinates. My point is that the relations which physics 
assumes in assigning angular co-ordinates are not identical 
with those which we perceive in the visual field, but merely 
correspond with them in a manner which preserves their 
logical (mathematical) properties. This follows from the 
assumption that any difference between two simultaneous 
percepts implies a correlative difference in their stimuli. 
Consequently, assuming that light travels in straight lines, 
two objects which produce percepts which differ in perceived 
direction must differ in some respect which corresponds with 
perceived direction. But we need not assume that physical 
direction has anything in common with visual direction except 
the logical properties impUed by the above assumption. I 
shall, in Part III., attempt a construction of physical space 
which wiU supply some of the detail of the correspondence; 
for the present, I am concerned to point out that we can only 
infer the logical (of mathematical) properties of physical space, 
and must not suppose that it is identical with the space of our 



STRUCTURE IN SCIENTIFIC INFERENCE 253 

perceptions. Indeed, as I shall try to prove later, the whole 
of a man’s visual space is, for physics, inside his head; this will 
follow from causal considerations. 

The same sort of considerations apply to colours and sounds. 
Colours and sounds can be arranged in an order with respect 
to several characteristics; we have a right to assume that their 
stimuli can be arranged in an order with respect to corre- 
sponding characteristics, but this, by itself, determines only 
certain logical properties of the stimuli. This applies to all 
varieties of percepts, and accounts for the fact that our know- 
ledge of physics is mathematical: it is mathematical because 
no non-mathematical properties of the physical world can be 
inferred from perception. 

There is, however, one exception to this limitation, at least 
apparently. The exception I mean is time. We always 
assume that the time between percepts is the same as the time 
in the physical world. I do not know whether this view is 
correct or not; but I will try to set forth the arguments on 
either side. 

In the first place, we must adapt our language to the theory 
of relativity. I shall assume (what I shall argue in Part III.) 
that, when we are speaking of physical space, all our percepts 
are in our head. Consequently psychological time is the same 
as time measured by our watches, assuming that we carry 
them on our person. Our head moves along a world-line, and 
our psychological time-intervals are measured physically by 
integrating ds along this world-line. Thus there is no difficulty 
in adapting the statement that psychological and physical 
time are identical to the requirements of the theory of rela- 
tivity. In this respect, time differs from space, because 
physically all our simultaneous percepts are in one place. 

I think, however, that the time-intervals between percepts 
are only to be obtained by means of inferences of the same 
sort as those which lead us to the physical world. Perceived 



254 STRUCTURE IN SCIENTIFIC INFERENCE 

relations are not between events at different times, but between 
a percept and a recollection, both of which occur at the same 
time ; or again, where very short times are concerned, between 
a sensation of maximum vividness and a fading (akoluthic) 
sensation. Sensations do not decay suddenly, but fade 
gradually, though very quickly. That is why a quick move- 
ment can be apprehended as a whole : the sensations belonging 
to earlier parts are still present, though less vivid, when the 
sensations belonging to later parts arise. Thus our knowledge 
of time seems to be inferred from perceived relations which are 
not strictly temporal. These relations are, I think, of three 
sorts. Two sorts have been mentioned ; the relation of a vivid 
to a fading sensation, and the relation of a percept to a recollec- 
tion. But in addition to these there is an order within recollec- 
tions : we can recollect a process in the right order. Here, also, 
however, all that we perceive is in the present, and the time- 
order of the original events is inferred from relations among the 
simultaneous events which constitute our present recollection. 
Thus the conclusion seems to be: Psychological time may be 
identified with physical time, because neither is a datum, but 
each is derived from data by inferences of the sort we have 
found elsewhere, namely, inferences which allow us to know 
only the logical or mathematical properties of what we infer. 

Thus it would seem that, wherever we infer from perceptions, 
it is only structure that we can validly infer; and structure 
is what can be expressed by mathematical logic, which includes 
mathematics. 

Before concluding this discussion, we must consider an 
extension of the notion of similarity which has considerable 
importance in relation to the inferences leading to the physical 
world. In defining similarity, we used a one-one relation 5. 
But we may substitute a many-one relation, and still obtain 
something useful. The importance of this is that, as we have 
seen, if we take a group of events constituting a physical 



STRUCTURE IN SCIENTIFIC INFERENCE 255 

object, the relation of the events which are nearer the object 
to those which are further from it is many-one, not one-one. 
If we are observing a man half a mile away, his appearance is 
not changed if he frowns, whereas it is changed for a man 
observing him from a distance of three feet. Considerable 
events may happen in the sun without being perceptible to us 
even with the best telescopes; but near the sun they may have 
effects which would be important to a percipient situated 
where these effects occur. It is obvious as a matter of logic 
that, if our correlating relation S is many-one, not one-one, 
logical inference in the sense in which 5 goes is just as feasible 
as before, but logical inference in the opposite sense is more 
difficult. That is why we assume that differing percepts have 
differing stimuli, but indistinguishable percepts need not have 
exactly similar stimuli. If we have xSx' andySy', where S is 
many-one, and if y and y' differ, we can infer that * and x' 
differ ; but if y and y' do not differ, we cannot infer that x and 
x' do not differ. We find often that indistinguishable percepts 
are followed by different effects — €.g. one glass of water 
causes typhoid and another does not. In such cases we 
assume imperceptible differences — which the microscope may 
render perceptible. But where there is no discoverable 
difference in the effects, we can still not be sure there is not a 
difference in the stimuli which may become relevant at some 
later stage. 

When the relation S is many-one, we shall say that the two 
systems which it correlates are “ semi-similar.” 

This consideration makes all physical inference more or less 
precarious. We can construct theories which fit the known 
facts, but we can never be sure that other theories would not 
fit them equally well. This is an essential limitation on 
scientific inference, which is generally recognized by men of 
science : no prudent man of science would maintain that such- 
and-such a theory is so firmly established that it will never call 



256 STRUCTURE IN SCIENTIFIC INFERENCE 


for modification. Newtonian gravitation came nearer to this 
certainty than any other theory has ever done ; yet Newtonian 
gravitation has had to be modified. The fundamental reason 
for this uncertainty, which remains even when we assume all 
the canons of scientific inference, is the fact that our relation S, 
which connects the physical object with the percept, is many- 
one and not one-one. 



CHAPTER XXV 

PERCEPTION FROM THE STANDPOINT OF PHYSICS 
Hitherto we have been taking perception as our starting- 
point, and considering how physics could be obtained as an 
inference from perception. In the present chapter, I want 
to pursue the opposite course, and consider how, assuming 
physics, percepts can find their place in the physical world. 

Let us first of all exclude certain problems which are not 
relevant to this inquiry. A “ percept,” considered as the 
epistemological basis of physics, must be a ” datum ” — it must 
be something noticed. Obviously, therefore, whatever may 
be true of percepts in general, those which afford empirical 
premisses for physics have to be ” known." But it is un- 
necessary for us to define " knowing " ; for physics, only the 
percepts are important, and our relation to them may be taken 
for granted. Similarly we need not consider whether, when 
we perceive, the occurrence is relational, involving a percept 
and a percipient, or whether the occurrence of the percept is 
all that happens at the moment, and its “ mental ’’ character 
is conferred by memory (in its most general sense). Such 
psychological questions need not concern us. What I wish to 
discuss is the physical status of percepts, i.e. of patches of 
colour, noises, smells, hardnesses, etc., as well as perceived 
spatial relations. And in this discussion I am now assuming 
ordinary physics, subject to the latitude of interpretation 
explained in Chapter I. 

Dr Whitehead's books are a protest against the “ bifurca- 
tion of nature " which has resulted from the causal theory of 
perception. With this protest I am in complete agreement. 
Locke’s belief, that the primary qualities belong to the object 
*57 17 



258 PERCEPTION FROM THE STANDPOINT OF PHYSICS 


and the secondary to the percipient, has been that of science 
in practice, whatever individual scientific men may have 
thought in their philosophic moments. The view which I 
wish to advocate is quite different. I hold that the world is 
very full of events, that often a group of these events, or some 
characteristic which the members of the group possess in 
varying degrees, is such as to suggest arrangement in an order, 
generally a symmetrical order about a centre — e.g. the percepts 
of different people when they look at a penny may be ordered 
by their size and by their shape. The orders derived from 
different sources are roughly identical : e.g. if we move so as 
to make the big drum look larger, we also move so as to make 
it sound louder. In this way we construct a space containing 
both percipients and physical objects; but percepts have a 
twofold location in this space, namely that of the percipient 
and that of the physical object. Keeping one half of this 
location fixed, we obtain the view of the world from a given 
place ; keeping the other half fixed, we obtain the views of a 
given physical object from different places. The first of 
these is a percipient, the second is a physical object. But the 
first half of this statement is to be taken with a grain of salt. 

The physical world, I suggest, considered as perceptible, 
consists of occurrences having this twofold location. For the 
moment I am concerned to assign the place of perception in 
such a scheme. 

Consider a spherical light-wave proceeding from a momentary 
flash. In vacuo, it advances in accordance with Maxwell's 
equations, but when it encounters matter it becomes trans- 
formed in one way or another according to circumstances. 
What do I mean by saying that it “ encounters matter ” ? 
The answer is quite straightforward. Connected with each 
electron or proton there is a gravitational field and an electro- 
magnetic field; these are displayed by laws modifying the 
” undisturbed ” distribution about other centres of such 



PERCEPTION FROM THE STANDPOINT OF PHYSICS 259 


things as light-waves. In fact, the fields may be said actually 
to consist of the formulae of such modification. Therefore 
when I say that a light-wave " encounters matter,” I mean that 
it is near the centre of some such systematic modification. 
The eye is a collection of such centres, and after traversing it 
the process which was a light-wave obeys a different set of 
laws. The percept is a term of this process, characterized by 
the fact that it occurs after traversing a region of a certain sort 
— to wit, an eye, an optic nerve, and part of a brain. Owing to 
its causal continuity with other parts of the process, it has, 
as its twofold location, on the one hand the source of light, on 
the other hand the brain. If it is said that a percept is 
” obviously ” not in the brain, that is because we are thinking 
of its location in the physical object, and comparing this with 
the location of the brain as a physical object. 

Certain explanations are called for, chiefly in virtue of 
Dr Broad’s criticisms.* In the first place, it is suggested that 
the above theory takes a common-sense view of the percipient's 
body, and derives from this an undue plausibility for the view 
which it suggests as to external objects. This is not the case, 
but in order to dispel the appearance of such an error it is 
necessary to explain the twofold character of a physical object. 
On the one hand, it is a group of ” appearances ” — i.e. of con- 
nected events — differing, from next to next, approximately 
according to the laws of perspective. On the other hand, a 
physical object has an influence upon the appearances of other 
objects, especially appearances in its neighbourhood, causing 
these to depart, in a greater or less degree, from what they 
would be if they followed the laws of perspective strictly. The 
sense organs have only this second function to perform in the 
theory of perception, while the object perceived has the first 
function. It is this difference of fimction, in the theory of 
perception, which makes it seem as if we were treating the 
* Scitntific Thought, Kegan Paul, 1923, pp. 331 esp. p. 533. 



26 o perception from THE STANDPOINT OF PHYSICS 


percipient’s body more realistically than external objects. 
Bnt this is only a matter of degree. The appearance of an 
external object is modified also by other external objects — 
e.g. by blue spectacles or by a microscope. I conceive the 
part played by the eye as essentially analogous to that played 
by a microscope: and I take the same view as to the part 
played by the optic nerve. 

Another objection urged by Dr Broad is that the above 
theory is at best only suitable to visual objects, not to objects 
known by other senses. Now I certainly hold that vision is 
much the most important and least misleading of the senses, 
when considered as a source of the fundamental notions of 
physics. But I do not admit that the view which I have 
suggested is in any way inapplicable to the other senses. This 
subject, however, demands some discussion. 

Let us take first the sense of touch. This sense is com- 
plicated by the fact that it has no special organ, such as the 
eye, but is diffused throughout the surface of the body. In 
order to avoid complications, let us assume that only the tip 
of the forefinger of the right hand is being used. I do not 
know what, exactly, is supposed to be the physical process in 
touch, but we may suppose that it is somewhat as follows: the 
electrons and protons of a certain part of the skin come into 
such close proximity to those of an external body that electrical 
disturbances are set up, which travel along the afferent nerves 
to the proper part of the brain, and produce corresponding 
disturbances there. It does not matter for our purposes if 
this view is not quite right, since the exact nature of the 
process is irrelevant. But there is one point of some im- 
portance, and that is, that the change or lack of change in a 
sensation of touch has more importance than in the case of 
sight. A printed letter, and even a printed word, can be seen 
at a glance; but to read “ Braille ” it is necessary to let the 
finger travel round the contours of the letters. Thus ^pe. 



PERCEPTION FROM THE STANDPOINT OF PHYSICS 261 

in the case of touch, is, in the main, inferred by means of 
movement ; the momentary datum is much simpler than many 
visual data. The inference to shape depends, of course, upon 
the assumption that the object touched has not changed its 
shape meanwhile; it would be difficult for a blind man to 
acquire correct views as to the shape of an eel. But when 
there is doubt the finger can be allowed to travel repeatedly 
round the contours of the object; if the result is similar on 
each occasion, it may be assumed that the object has kept an 
approximately unchanging shape. 

There is another respect in which touch is inferior to sight, 
and that is, that the spatial relation of the physical object to 
the percipient’s body is much more restricted. The physical 
object must be very close to the part of the percipient’s body 
which is said to be touching it. This means that its location 
is confined within a certain small region. Within that region 
touch can locate it rather well, provided a sensitive part of 
the skin is used; we know the position of our hand by means of 
feelings connected with the muscles, and thence we know the 
position of anything in contact with the hand. The inter- 
vening medium, in the case of touch, is always a part of the 
percipient’s body; but its influence is shown in the difference 
between the touch sensations when a physical object touches 
one part of the body and when it touches another. Thus our 
theory applies to touch just as well as to sight. 

Sound is, in many ways, very analogous to light. It is a 
disturbance having a centre, and is greatest near the centre. 
What we hear is loudest when we are near the centre. 'The 
direction of the sound can be gauged roughly, though not with 
anything approaching the precision with which we can gauge 
the direction of a visual object. Here, also, we have a certain 
physical process, which obeys certain laws in air, but obeys 
somewhat different laws in the ear and nerves and brain. 
These differences, however, may be conceived to be of the 



262 PERCEPTION FROM THE STANDPOINT OF PHYSICS 


same kind, essentially, as those nonnally produced in physical 
processes by the presence of matter. I cannot see, therefore, 
that sound offers any difficulty. 

The other senses are much less important as sources of 
phj^ical knowledge, and it seems unnecessary to discuss them 
in detail. Physiology, however, tends to show that any 
abnormal condition of the sense organs or of the afferent nerves 
tends to modify percepts in such a way as requires, for its 
explanation, some such theory as ours. It is a fallacy to 
argue, as is sometimes done, that, if we cannot trust our 
senses, we cannot know that we have sense organs, or that 
there is any truth in physiology. If we find that several 
people, looking at Jones, see him just as usual, while one person 
sees him looking queer; if the several see nothing queer in each 
other’s eyes, while they all see something queer in the eyes of 
the one ; in such cirexunstances, I say, it is natural and proper 
to correlate the two queemesses. The man who sees Jones 
differently from usual sees him through a medium which has 
an xmusual effect ; there is no more ground for scepticism than 
is to be derived from the effect of opera glasses. The sceptical 
argument is only valid as against naive realism, and derives 
its rhetorical force from our tendency to relapse into naive 
realism whenever we are not on our guard. 

The cognitive efficacy of perception depends upon two 
factors, one physical and one psychological (and physiological). 
The psychological factor is memory and the whole effect of 
experience upon mind and body. This is a large subject, 
which I mention only to dismiss. The physical factor, how- 
ever, may be pointed out once more. It is, the fact that 
physical occurrences tend to be grouped about centres, the 
members of one group being approximately related according 
to laws which we have called the laws of perspective. This 
enables us to infer from a percept other percepts which we 
should have if we moved, or which other percipients have now. 



PERCEPTION FROM THE STANDPOINT OF PHYSICS 263 

When one astronomer sees an eclipse of the moon, he can be 
pretty sure that others see it too if they are looking in the right 
direction. When one man sees the Derby, he can be pretty 
sure that the other spectators are also seeing it — i.e. that they 
have percepts which can be inferred approximately from his 
by the laws of perspective. As to what is happening where 
there is no percipient, we can, on certain assumptions, infer 
a good deal as to its mathematical structure, but nothing as 
to its intrinsic quality. In a word, the inferential power of 
perception depends upon the fact that physical events occur 
in connected groups, and is limited by the fact that this is 
only true to a certain degree of approximation. 

There remains one matter of considerable importance to be 
discussed in this connection — I mean, theprima facie difference 
between a percept and a physical process. At first sight, a 
light-wave seems very different from a visual percept, and a 
sound-wave from an auditory percept. But this apparent 
gulf is due to comparison of events of different orders. A 
physical disturbance, such as a light-wave, must be regarded 
as much more complex in reality than in mathematics. Events 
in the physical world are correlated according to certain laws, 
and we can, for mathematical purposes, treat a whole group of 
correlated events as if it were one event. There is no theo- 
retical reason why a light-wave should not consist of groups of 
occurrences, each containing a member more or less analogous 
to a minute part of a visual percept. We cannot perceive a 
light-wave, since the interposition of an eye and brain stops it. 
We know, therefore, only its abstract mathematical properties. 
Such properties may belong to groups composed of any kind of 
material. To assert that the material must be very different 
from percepts is to assume that we know a great deal more than 
we do in fact know of the intrinsic character of physical events. 
If there is any advantage in supposing that the light-wave, the 
process in the eye, and the process in the optic nerve, contain 



264 PERCEPTION FROM THE STANDPOINT OF PHYSICS 


events qualitatively continuous with the final visual percept, 
nothing that we know of the physical world can be used to 
disprove the supposition. 

The gulf between percepts and physics is not a gulf as 
regards intrinsic quality, for we know nothing of the intrinsic 
quality of the physical world, and therefore do not know 
whether it is, or is not, very different from that of percepts. 
The gulf is as to what we know about the two realms. We know 
the quality of percepts, but we do not know their laws so well 
as we could wish. We know the laws of the physical world, 
in so far as these are mathematical, pretty well, but we know 
nothing else about it. If there is any intellectual difficulty 
in supposing that the physical world is intrinsically quite 
unlike that of percepts, this is a reason for supposing that 
there is not this complete unlikeness. And there is a certain 
ground for such a view, in the fact that percepts are part of 
the physical world, and are the only part that we can know 
without the help of rather elaborate and difficult inferences. 



CHAPTER XXVI 


NON-MENTAL ANALOGUES TO PERCEPTION 
As we saw in Chapter XXV., the cognitive value of perception 
— i.e. its capacity for giving rise to inferences which are often 
valid — is a product of two factors, one depending upcm the 
hiunan mind and body, the other purely physical. The factor 
which depends upon the human mind and body is that which 
is concerned with “ mnemic ” phenomena. These occur 
wherever there is life, and to some slight extent in “ dead ’* 
matter; but the higher the type of life the more notable they 
become. It is, however, the physical factor in perception that 
I wish to consider in this chapter, as it appears when separated 
from the mnemic factor. That is to say, I want to emphasize 
the fact that a percept is one of a system of correlated events, 
all structurally similar or semi-similar, and that the physical 
world, so far as known, consists of such events. My main 
purpose in dwelling upon this topic is to make it clear that 
percepts fit easily and naturally into their place in the physical 
world, and are not to be regarded as something quite different 
from the processes with which physics is concerned. 

Let us revert to our earlier illustration of the dictaphone 
and camera which record a conversation with its accompanying 
action, and are found to agree with the recollections of eye- 
witnesses. When we considered this coincidence in a previous 
chapter, we were concerned with fundamental doubts; now 
wd will assume the four-dimensional manifold of physics and 
the justification (in principle) of the inference from perceived 
to unperceived events. Assuming this, what can we infer as 
to the relation between (a) the sounds heard by the listener, 
(i) the events just outside his ear when he hears, (c) the events 
265 



266 NON-MENTAL ANALOGUES TO PERCEPTION 


at the dictaphone at the same time, (d) the dictaphone record, 
(e) the sounds heard by the man when he listens to the 
dictaphone ? 

The similarity between (a) and (tf) is fundamental, and is 
known by a comparison of a percept with a memory. Thus 
the problem of the relation between perception and memory 
is involved; but as this problem is psychological, I will only 
say that the inference from a recollection (which occurs now) 
to what is recollected (which occurred at a former time) appears 
to me to be essentially similar to the inferences in physics, and 
to warrant only a belief in identity (or close similarity) of 
structure between the recollection and the event recollected. 
The grounds for the trustworthiness of memory seem to be of 
the same kind as those for the trustworthiness of perception. 
But I shall take all this for granted, since our theme is physics, 
not psychology. I shall therefore assume that (a) and (e) can 
be known to be similar in structure, in the sense explained in 
Chapter XXIV. 

We have thus a chain of processes, (a) at one end and (e) at 
the other; the end-processes are similar in the technicad sense, 
and we assume that the intermediate processes are also similar, 
both to each other and to the end-processes. Let us consider 
this in somewhat more detail. The relation of (a) and (b) is 
that of percept and stimulus — i.e. a relation of effect to cause. 
The effect is a complex process; we assume that recognizably 
different percepts must have different stimuli; therefore the 
cause must be a complex process, at least semi-similar to the 
effect. We may take it as similar, not merely semi-similar, by 
ignoring those respects? if any, in which the structure of the 
cause is more complex than the structure of the effect. A 
similar argument will enable us to treat (d) and (e) as similar. 
Since (a) and (e) are similar, it follows that (b) and (d) are 
similar. We caimot attribute this similarity to chance, since 
it is found to exist whenever the necessary conditions have 



NON-MENTAL ANALOGUES TO PERCEPTION *67 

been fulfilled. Hence we infer that (c) must also be similar 
to the other processes. Since the dictaphone may be placed 
an3nvhere in the neighbourhood of the speakers, we infer that 
throughout a region surrounding them there are physical events 
similar in structure to the aural percepts of the listener. For 
light, the same thing follows from photographs. Consequently 
a percept, considered physically, is not very different from 
other physical events. We may suppose, if we choose, that it 
differs from them in intrinsic quality, and we know that it 
differs causally, since it gives rise to memories and inferences. 
Even these, however, are not so different from certain physical 
processes as they seem at first sight. 

Memory is shown by the capacity for producing events 
similar in structure to certain previous events, vfeen the right 
stimulus is applied. We are not always remembering every- 
thing that we can remember; we remember things when we 
are asked about them, or when something occurs which recalls 
them by association. The dictaphone “ remembers ” in this 
sense. It is true that it cannot “ infer it will not answer a 
question which it has never heard answered. But physio- 
logical inference, which is causally the basis of aU other 
inference, is not very unlike other physical processes, and may 
quite possibly proceed according to the laws of physics. How- 
ever, I do not wish to pursue these psychological topics; it is 
only perception and its non-mental analogues that I wish to 
consider. 

We have to suppose that a great many events are taking 
place everywhere, since both light and soimd can be recorded 
by instruments and observed by percipients. Our visual 
field is very complex, and the physical stimulus must have 
at least equal complexity: if this were not the case, we could 
not see a number of objects at once, nor could a photographic 
plate photograph them. Physics, however, simplifies all this 
by taking the stimulus to a sensation to be a periodic process. 



268 NON-MENTAL ANALOGUES TO PERCEPTION 


not a static event. Our percepticoi of colour, for example, 
does not seem to be a periodic process analogous to a light- 
wave; in this respect, the apparent structure of a visual per- 
cept differs from that which physics assumes in the external 
cause. A few words must be said on this topic, in order to 
make clear its relation to our general theory of similarity of 
structure. 

First; in a transaction such as the passage from stimulus to 
percept, we cannot expect complete similarity of structure: at 
most we can expect as much as we find in purely physical 
transactions. There is a great deal of difference between a 
light-wave and a quantum change in an atom, yet they are 
related as effect to cause. What we know about the atom 
we know in virtue of the light-waves which make us see things ; 
unless differences in light-waves corresponded to difierences in 
atoms, light-waves wo\ild not be vehicles of information about 
atoms. Now when light-waves reach the eye, they have 
effects upon the matter of the eye, which reverse the previous 
process from quantum changes to light-waves. It is possible, 
in view of such theories as we considered in Chapter XIII., 
that the relation between what happens in the atom and what 
happens in the eye is more direct than the above account would 
suggest, but it would not be prudent to assume that this is the 
case until the theory of light quanta has become more adequate . 
We cannot, therefore, assume any very close relation between 
the physical process in the eye and the physical process in the 
atom from which the light comes. And a fortiori we cannot 
assume a very close relation between the percept and the 
process in the radiating atom. Yet it is only in so far as sudi 
a relation exists that vision can be accepted as a source of 
physical knowledge; in so far as the correspondence fails, 
vision ceases to be trustworthy. 

Secondly: there is no reason why the degree of corre- 
spondence between stimulus and percept which is required 



NON-MENTAL ANALOGUES TO PERCEPTION 269 


should not exist between a periodic process and a static occur- 
rence. So long as different processes give rise to different 
percepts, the requisites in the way of correspondence are 
satisfied. There is therefore no theoretic difficulty in the view 
that the stimulus to a sensation of red is a vibration, while the 
sensation of red itself has not this character, but is a steady 
state capable of continuing for a short finite time. 

Thirdly : we do not really know that our percept of a colour 
does not have the rhythmic character of the stimulus. We 
know something about percepts, but not all about them. We 
all know that if an object is made to rotate rapidly, for instance 
on a top, we can see it rotating if it does not go too fast, but 
when it passes a certain speed we see only a continuous band. 
This is to be expected in view of the existence of akoluthic 
sensations. But it by no means follows that there is not a 
dicker in the percept, although we cannot perceive a flicker. 
Exactly the same thing applies to light and sound generally, 
and to the apparent continuity of motion in the cinema. We 
cannot know, unless in virtue of some elaborate argument, 
whether our percepts are static or rhythmical, nor yet whether 
their physical stimuli are continuous or discrete. Such know- 
ledge is rendered impossible by the fact that we can only assume 
semi-similarity, not full similarity, between percept and 
stimulus. 

There is therefore no difficulty in the accepted theory that 
the stimuli to our most important percepts are rapid periodic 
processes. On the other hand, there is a great advantage in 
this theory, in that it simplifies the physical world which has 
to be assumed as the cause of our perceptions. A physical 
system, conceived merely as a set of material imits in space- 
time, is capable of an indefinite variety of rhythmic move- 
ments. Some physical structures are resonant for one period, 
some for another. Thus our sense-organs can select one sort 
of movement as the stimulus to which they will respond, and 



270 NON-MENTAL ANALOGUES TO PERCEPTION 


reject all the rest. In fact, it may be said that the essential 
characteristic of a sense-organ is sensitiveness to one sort of 
stimulus, which, in the case of the eye or the ear, must be a 
periodic movement. In this the sense-organs do not differ 
fron^ lifeless instruments, such as photographic plates and 
gramophones. Such instruments have something closely 
analogous to perception, when we leave out of account the 
mental consequences which we observe in ourselves as a result 
of perception. And in a certain extended sense we may say 
that every body which behaves in a characteristic manner 
when a certain stimulus is present, and only then, has a 
" perception ” of that stimulus. We can infer the stimulus 
from the behaviour of such a body just as well as from our 
own percepts — sometimes better, as in the case of a very 
sensitive photographic plate. 

The outcome of the discussion we have been conducting in 
Part II. has been to justify the ordinary scientific attitude, 
and to minimize the gulf which seems at first sight to exist 
between perception and physics. We have seen that the 
inference from percepts to unperceived physical events, though 
it cannot be made mathematically cogent, is quite as good 
as any inductive inference can hope to be . And we have found 
that there is no ground in philosophy for supposing the physical 
world to be very different from what physics asserts it to be. 
But we have found it necessary to emphasize the extremely 
abstract character of physical knowledge, and the fact that 
physics leaves open all kinds of possibilities as to the intrinsic 
character of the world to which its equations apply. There is 
nothing in physics to prove that the physical world is radically 
different in character from the mental world. I do not myself 
believe that the philosophical arguments for the view that 
all reality must be mental are valid. But I also do not believe 
that any valid arguments against this view are to be derived 
from physics. The only legitimate attitude about the physical 



NON-MENTAL ANALOGUES TO PEECEPTION 271 


world seems to be one of complete agnosticism as regards all 
but its mathematical properties. However, something can 
be done in the way of constructing possible physical worlds 
which fulfil the equations of physics and yet resemble rather 
more closely the world of perception than does the world 
ordinarily presented in physics. Such constructions have the 
merit of making the inference from perception to physics 
seem more reliable, since they save us from the necessity of 
assuming anything radically different from what we know. 
From this point of view, they have a certain interest, and I 
shall partially develop them, at least as regards space-time, 
in Part III. But they must not be confounded with scientific 
knowledge: they are hypotheses which may hereafter prove 
fruitful, and which have already a certain imaginative value. 
But they are not to be regarded as necessitated by any 
recognized principle of scientific inference, 




PART III 

THE STRUCTURE OF THE PHYSICAL WORLD 




CHAPTER XXVII 

PARTICULARS AND EVENTS 

We shall be concerned, in what follows, with the construction 
of a map of the physical world, in part more or less con- 
jectural, but never in contradiction to the physical or epistemo- 
logical results hitherto considered. We shall seek to construct 
a metaphysic of matter which shall make the gulf between 
physics and perception as small, and the inferences involved 
in the causal theory of perception as little dubious, as possible. 
We do not want the percept to appear mysteriously at the end 
of a causal chain composed of events of a totally different 
nature; if we can construct a theory of the physical world 
which makes its events continuous with perception, we have 
improved the metaphysical status of physics, even if we cannot 
prove more than that our theory is possible. In what follows, 
some portions will be more conjectural than others, but I shall 
try to indicate, at each stage, whether I am advancing what 
I believe to be a well-grounded inference by induction and 
analogy, or whether I am concerned only with an illustrative 
hypothesis designed to exhibit the possibilities that are com- 
patible with the abstract scientific knowledge to be derived 
from physics. 

We have found, hitherto, that what we know of the physical 
world falls into two parts: on the one hand, the concrete but 
disjointed knowledge of percepts; on the other hand, the 
abstract but systematic knowledge of the physical world as 
a whole. Certain questions as to structure are answered by 
physics, while others are left open. The questions which are 
left open are of a sort of which some must always remain open 
—namely. Is any further analysis of the terms which are 

275 



PARTICULARS AND EVENTS 


276 

ultimate for physics possible, and, if so, what means exist of 
conjecturing its nature ? In science, we have evidence of 
structure down to a certain point, while beyond that point 
we have no evidence. There can never be evidence that the 
point we have reached is one beyond which there is no struc- 
ture — i.e. that we have arrived at simple units totally devoid 
of parts; therefore analysis is essentially incapable of reaching 
a term known to be final, even if it has in fact reached a final 
term. I think that, in the case of physics, there is reason to 
think that its terms are not final, and that it is possible to 
suggest a further analysis which is at least likely to be true. 

When we wish to describe a structure, we have to do so by 
means of terms and relations. It may turn out that the terms 
themselves have a structure, as, e.g., in arithmetic, when 
cardinal integers are defined as classes of similar classes. In 
the technique of mathematical physics, there is a considerable 
apparatus which belongs to the formal method, and would 
not be regarded by most physicists as having any physical 
reality. Such is the manifold of space-time points. Space- 
time is held to represent a system of physical facts, but its 
mathematical points are generally conceded to be fictions. 
Such a state of affairs is imsatisfactory until we can say just 
what non-fictional assertion is implicit in a true proposition of 
physics which technically uses " points.” I propose to deal 
with this problem in the next chapter. 

But what shall we say of electrons ? Are they physical 
realities, or are they mathematical conveniences, like points ? 
Or are they something intermediate between these two ex- 
tremes ? We think of a light-ray as a series of events; is an 
electron perhaps something similar ? But the light-ray also 
raises problems; it has a certain assigned mathematical 
structure, but it is difficult to say what we are to think of the 
mathematical terms of this structure. Formerly, the con- 
ception of a transverse wave in the tether seemed fairly clear : 



PARTICULARS AND EVENTS 277 

the ather was composed of particles, each of which could move 
in the required manner. But nowadays the ather is grown 
insubstemtial and incapable of “ motion ” in any straight- 
forward sense; certainly few people would venture to regard 
it as composed of point-particles, like the homogeneous fluid 
of a hydrodynamical text-book. Thus the light-wave has 
become a structure in the air, like a genealogical tree whose 
members are all imaginary. This illustrates a necessity in 
describing a structure; the terms are as important as the 
relations, and we cannot rest content with terms which we 
believe to be fictitious. It is the terms of the physical 
structure that will concern us in the present chapter. 

I shall give the name “ particulars ” to the ultimate terms 
of the physical structure — ultimate, I mean, in relation to 
the whole of our present knowledge. A " particular,” that 
is to say, will be something which is concerned in the physical 
world merely through its qualities or its relations to other 
things, never through its own structure, if any. The difference 
between a transverse wave and a longitudinal wave is a 
difference of structure ; therefore neither can be a ' ‘ particular ’ ’ 
in the technical sense in which I mean it. An atom is a 
structure of electrons and protons; therefore an atom is not 
a " particular.” But when I call something a " particular,” 
I do not mean to assert that it certainly has no structure; 
I assert only that nothing in the known laws of its behaviour 
and relations gives us reason to infer a structure. From the 
standpoint of logic, a particular fulfils the definition of “ sub- 
stance ” which we gave in Chapter XXIII. But it fulfils this 
definition only in the existing state of knowledge; fmiiher 
discoveries may require us to recognize structure within it, 
and it will then cease to fulfil the definition of substance. This 
does not falsify former statements as to the structure of the 
world, in which the particular in question was taken as un- 
analyzable; it merely adds new propositions, in which it is no 



278 PARTICULARS AND EVENTS 

longer so treated. Atoms were formerly particulars ; now they 
have ceased to be so. But that has not falsified the chemical 
propositions which can be enunciated without taking account 
of their structure. The word " particular,” as above defined, 
is, therefore, a word relative to our knowledge, not an absolute 
metaphysical term. 

Let us begin with a few general considerations as to our 
knowledge of structure. Part of this knowledge is obtainable 
by analysis of percepts, part depends upon inferences in- 
volving unperceived entities. I shall call a relation " per- 
ceived ” or “ perceptual " if the fact that this relation holds 
between certain terms can be discovered by mere analysis of 
percepts. Thus before-and-after is a perceptual relation, 
when it occurs between terms both of which belong to the 
specious present. Spatial relations within the visual field are 
perceptual; so are those between simultaneous tactual sensa- 
tions in different parts of the body. Tactual sensations in the 
same part of the body, say a finger-tip, may have perceived 
relations, if both are within the specious present ; these must 
be important in the recognition of shape by blind people. 
There are perceived relations between a percept and a recol- 
lection, which lead us to refer the latter to the past. There 
are perceived relations of comparison, which may sometimes 
be rather complicated — e.g. “ The resemblance of blue and 
green is greater than the resemblance of blue and yellow.” 
(Here the blue and green and yellow are supposed to be 
particular given patches of colour.) There is also, I should 
say, a perceived relation of simultaneity. I do not suggest 
that the above list is complete, but it indicates the kinds of 
cases in which relations can be perceived. 

There is a well-advertised type of difficulty in such cases 
as the analysis of a perceived motion. If I move my hand 
before my eyes from left to right, and attend to the visual 
percept, it seems qualitatively different from the successive 



PARTICULARS AND EVENTS 


279 


perceptions of my hand in a number of different positions. 
On a watch, we can " see ” the motion of the second hand, but 
not of the minute hand. There is no doubt that there is an 
occurrence which we naturally describe as the perception of a 
motion. We are aware of perceiving a process: if I move 
my hand from left to right, the impression is different from 
what it is if I move my hand from right to left, and it is obvious 
to everyone that the difference is in the “ sense ” of the 
motion. We can, in fact, distinguish earlier and later parts 
of the motion, so that the motion does not appear to be with- 
out structure. But the parts of it seem to be other motions, 
which, presumably, must each have its own structure. This 
leads to the notion of infinite divisibility, not based upon a 
definable structure of indivisibles, but upon a process in which 
the parts are always composed of parts similar in structure 
to themselves, and simple parts are nowhere attainable. The 
paradoxes of motion, the antinomies, Bergson’s objection to 
analysis, and the philosophers’ insistence that the Cantorian 
continuum does not resolve their difficulties, are all derived 
from this one puzzle, that a motion seems to consist of motiops 
— or, as Kant says, that a space consists of spaces. 

It is important to clear up this problem of the analysis of 
the percept of motion, since it applies to all perception of 
change, and has been thought to constitute a difficulty in the 
attempt to harmonize psychology and physics. To begin 
with, continuity in the percept is no evidence of continuity in 
the physical process; it is easy to produce a staccato process 
which causes a continuous (or apparently continuous) percept 
— e.g. in the cinema. Next, it is noteworthy that, if a staccato 
physical process is gradually accelerated, the percept will 
retain its staccato character longer if we are wide awake and 
have acute senses than if we are sleepy or have feeble senses. 
Everybody knows the experience of being awakened from a 
doze by a striking clock : at first, the noise of the strike seems 



28 o 


PARTICULARS AND EVENTS 


continuous. It is therefore a tellable hs^wthesis, if desirable 
on other grounds, to maintain that all physical processes are 
staccato, and continuity in percepts is merely a case of vague- 
ness, in the sense of a many-one relation between stimulus 
and percept. I am not asserting such a view ; I am only saying 
that it fits in with what we know of the relation between 
stimulus and percept in the case of swift processes. A fortiori, 
the mathematical continuum, if it existed in the stimulus 
process, would produce the percepts we call continuous. There 
is therefore nothing in our perception of process to make us 
feel that the mathematical analysis of continuity must be 
inadequate to physics, nor yet to show that a quantized time 
and space could not produce the sort of percepts which we 
call " seeing a motion.” All physical possibilities are left 
open, so far as the immediate character of the percept is 
concerned. 

The argument advanced by those who lay stress upon the 
perceived character of perceptual continuity is, however, not 
as to the nature of the physical stimulus, but as to the nature 
of the percept. The continuity of the percept, they maintain, 
is quite obviously not that of the mathematical continuum^ 
nor yet the deceptive appearance of continuity which would 
exist if the percept were a rapid staccato process. In saying 
this, they seem to me to go beyond what the evidence warrants. 
Consider a case which is analogous in some respects, but not 
in others — ^namely, the case of slightly different shades of 
colour. Suppose we have a series of colours, /I, B, C, Z>, . . . 
such that each is sensibly indistinguishable from its neighbour, 
but not from the rest. That is to say, we can see no difference 
between A and B or between B and C, but we can see a 
difference between A and C. We are then compelled to infer 
a difierence between A and B and between B and C, although 
we cannot perceive any difference. There is no theoretical 
difficulty in such an inference, for, although A and B and C 



PARTICULARS AND EVENTS 


281 


are percepts, and the difference between A and C is a percept, 
there is no reason why the differences between A and B and 
between B and C should be percepts: the relations between 
percepts are sometimes percepts and sometimes not. Now, 
instead of different static shades of colour, let us suppose that 
we are watching a chameleon gradually changing. We may 
be quite unable to “ see ” a process of change, and yet able 
to know that, after a time, a change has taken place. This 
will occur if, supposing A and B to be the shades at the be- 
ginning and end of a specious present, A and B are indis- 
tinguishable, while A recollected is distinguishable from C 
when C occurs. The supposition we have to make about a 
perceived motion is not quite analogous to this, but has 
certain points in common with it. Suppose that we are per- 
ceiving a motion in a case where we know the physical stimulus 
to consist of a discrete series, as in the cinema. Let us suppose 
that n of these stimuli can be comprised within one specious 
present, and that each produces an element in the percept. 
Then the percept at one instant consists of n elements x^, x^, 
... which are arranged in an order by the degree of fading. 
Let us suppose that we cannot distinguish x^ from x^, nor 
X2 from *3, but that we can distinguish *1 from x^. In that 
case our present percept will be indistinguishable from the 
percept of a continuous motion. The percept will in fact 
contain parts- that are not processes, but these parts will be 
imperceptible. The analogy with the case of the colours 
arises through the existence, in each case, of a series in which 
differences of neighbouring terms are imperceptible while 
those of distant terms are perceptible. And it elicits the im- 
portant principle that a percept may have parts which are not 
percepts, so that the structure of a percept may be only dis- 
coverable by inference. It follows also that we need not 
assume anything mysterious about the kind of complexity 
belonging to a percept of motion, but may regard its com- 



282 


PARTICULARS AND EVENTS 


plexity as of the same kind as that belonging to the stimulus 
according to mathematical physics. 

I wish now to consider the general question: how can we 
infer structure when it is not perceived ? The above discus- 
sion of motion involved a particular case of such inference, 
but now I wish to consider the problem more generally. 

For reasons analogous to those which arise in analyzing 
motion, we are led to the view that all our percepts are com- 
posed of imperceptible parts. We can, for instance, perceive 
a heap of fine powder, and remove the whole heap grain by 
grain, where at each stage there is no perceptible difference. 
Our original percept may have had perceptible parts, but 
these were apparently always complex. It is not strictly 
necessary to suppose the percepts complex ; they might form a 
series of gradually varying quality. But we may say, in a 
sense, that the difference of A and C (supposed perceptible) is 
compounded of the differences between A and B, B and C 
(supposed imperceptible). Thus we arrive at virtually the 
same result in regard to qualitative differences as we have 
otherwise in regard to substantial parts. All such arguments 
rest ultimately upon the logical premiss that exact similarity 
is transitive, and the empirical premiss that indistinguish- 
ability is not transitive. These two together are the soTurce of 
much of our inference as regards structure. 

There is, however, another source, derived from causal 
arguments. Two indistinguishable percepts are found to be 
followed by different results. Inverting the maxim “ same 
cause, same effect," we argue: " Different effects, different 
causes." Often the difference in the causes becomes perceptible 
under the microscope; but we assume it in any case. It is 
this, more than an)dhing else, that has led to the minuteness 
of the processes inferred by physics. There are noticeable 
differences in the effects in cases where we know that the 
difference in the causes, if any, must be very small; we are 



PARTICULARS AND EVENTS 


283 

therefore compelled to attribute to the physical world a 
structure which is very fine-grained relatively to perception. 

It is necessary to consider the very usual form of analysis 
into diversity of " substance,” because, for reasons already 
given, we cannot regard this form of analysis as ultimate. 
Let us take the most elementary of scientific examples; the 
analysis of water into hydrogen and oxygen. We recognize 
water by a group of characteristic percepts and processes ; by 
another group we recognize hydrogen, and by yet another 
oxygen. We find that we can — e.g. by electrolysis — produce 
hydrogen and oxygen where formerly there was water; we 
find that the masses of the two bear a fixed proportion to each 
other, and add up to the mass of the previous water; we find 
further that, if we let them come together, water reappears, 
equal in amount to what was lost by electrolysis. Such facts 
are interpreted in science by means of the postulate that matter 
is indestructible. If we accept this postulate, the facts prove 
that water consists of hydrogen and oxygen. Exactly similar 
arguments lead us on from atoms to electrons and protons, 
where, for the present, the process of substantial analysis 
ceases. 

Without questioning the convenience of sqbstantial analysis, 
it may be asked whether it is metaphysically accurate, and 
even whether, at the stage we have reached, it is adequate 
to all the needs of physics. We must now examine the argu- 
ments on this question. 

As regards adequacy for phj^cs; we have already (in 
Chapter IV.) given a brief account of Heisenberg’s theory, 
which, in effect, resolves the electron into a series of radiations. 
We have also seei» that electrons and protons are not now 
supposed to be strictly indestructible, but are thought by 
many to be capable of annihilating each other. Thus the 
indestructibihty of matter is no longer accepted as a imiversal 
law of the physical world. With this goes the fact that proper 



PARTICULARS AND EVENTS 


284 

mass is not supposed to be exactly conserved, and that relative 
mass has been absorbed into energy. Mass was supposed to 
be " quantity of matter." This certainly could not be said 
of relative mass, which depends upon the choice of axes and 
belongs also to light-waves. And if it be said of proper mass, 
we must conclude that the “ quantity of matter ’’ is not quite 
constant. On all these grounds, persistent units of matter, 
though still convenient, have no longer the metaphysical 
status that they were formerly supposed to have. 

This conclusion is reinforced by argmnents of economy. 
We perceive events, not substances; that is to say, what we 
perceive occupies a volume of space-time which is small in all 
four dimensions, not indefinitely extended in one dimension 
(time). And what we can primarily infer from percepts, 
assuming the validity of physics, are groups of events, again 
not substances. It is a mere linguistic convenience to regard 
a group of events as states of a " thing,” or " substance," or 
" piece of matter.” This inference was originally made on the 
ground of the logic which philosophers inherited from common 
sense. But the logic was faulty, and the inference is un- 
necessary. By defining a " thing ” as the group of what 
would formerly have been its " states,” we alter nothing in 
the detail of physics, and avoid an inference as precarious as 
it is useless. 

What, then, shall we say about the analysis of water into 
hydrogen and oxygen ? We shall say something of tliis sort : 
Water has, for common sense, a certain amount of permanence : 
although puddles dry up, the sea is always there. This 
permanence, interpreted wnthout the use of " substance," 
means certain intrinsic causal laws; the behaviour of the sea 
can, to a considerable extent, be discovered by observing only 
the sea, without taking account of other things. Similarity 
on different occasions is the most obvious of these approximate 
causal laws. But water can change into ice or snow or steam : 



PARTICULARS AND EVENTS 285 

here we can observe the gradual transformation, and continuity 
takes the place of likeness for common sense. In all changes, 
we find, on examination, that there is some continuity like 
that between water and ice; we thus trace a causal chain, 
more or less separable from other causal chains, and having 
enough intrinsic unity to be regarded as successive states of 
one " substance.” When we throw over " substance,” we 
preserve the causal chain, substituting the unity of a causal 
process for material identity. Thus the persistence of sub- 
stance is replaced by the persistence of causal laws, which 
was, in fact, the criterion by which the supposed material 
identity was recognized. We thus preserve everything that 
there was reason to suppose true, and reject only a piece of 
unfruitful metaphysics. 

The anal3^is of water into hydrogen and oxygen represents, 
therefore, the analysis of one approximate causal law into two 
more nearly accurate causal laws. If you infer that where 
there was water yesterday there is water to-day, you are 
emplo)nng a causal law which is not always correct. If you 
infer that where there was hydrogen and oxygen there is 
hydrogen and oxygen (or at least that there is hydrogen and 
oxygen in places connected by a continuous route with where 
they were yesterday), you are very unlikely to be wrong, 
unless the place is in the neighbourhood of Sir Ernest Ruther- 
for d It is assumed (what is only partially true at present) 
that the properties of water can be inferred from those of 
oxygen and hydrogen together with the manner in which 
they are combined in the molecules of water. Thus by means 
of analysis you have obtained causal laws which are at once 
more true and more powerful than those which common sense 
could obtain by supposing that all the parts of water were 
water. 

We may say that this is the characteristic merit of analysis 
as practised in science; it enables us to arrive at a structure 



386 


PARTICULARS AND EVENTS 


such that the properties of the complex can be inferred from 
those of the parts.* And it enables us to arrive at laws which 
are permanent, not merely temporary and approximate. 
This is an ideal, only partially verified as yet; but the degree 
of verification is abundantly sufficient to justify science in 
constructing the world out of minute units. 

From what has been said about substance, I draw the con- 
clusion that science is concerned with groups of " events,” 
rather than with ” things ” that have changing “ states,” 
This is also the natural conclusion to draw from the substitu- 
tion of space-time for space and time. The old notion of 
substance had a certain appropriateness so long as we could 
believe in one cosmic time and one cosmic space; but it does 
not fit in so easily when we adopt the fom-dimensional space- 
time framework. I shall therefore assume henceforth that 
the physical world is to be constructed out of “ events,” by 
which I mean practically, as already explained, entities or 
structures occup5dng a region of space-time which is small 
in all four dimensions. “Events” may have a structure, 
but it is convenient to use the word “ event," in the strict 
sense, to mean something which, if it has a structure, has 
no space-time structure, i.e. it does not have parts which 
are external to each other in space-time. I do not assume 
that an event can ever occupy only a point of space-time; 
the construction of “ points " out of finitely extended 
events will form the subject of the next chapter. Nor do 
I assign a maximum to the duration of an event, though I 
hold that any event, in the broad sense, which lasts for more 

* Dr C. D. Broad, in The Mind and its Place in Nature, lays stress 
upon what he calls “ emergent ” properties of complexes — i.e. such as 
cannot be inferred from the properties and relations of the parts. I 
believe that “ emergent " properties represent merely scientific incom- 
pleteness, which would not exist in the ideal physics. It is difficult to 
advance any conclusive argument on either side as to the ultimate 
character of apparently " emergent *’ properties, but I think my view 
is supported by such examples as the e^^ation of chemistry in terms 
of physics by means of the Rutherford-mhr theory of atomic structure. 



PARTICULARS AND EVENTS 287 

than about a second can, if it is a percept, be analyzed into a 
structure of events. But this is a merely empirical fact. 

There are certain purely logical principles whith are useful 
in regard to structure. When we are dealing with inferred 
entities, as to which, as explained in Part II., we know 
nothing beyond structure, we may be said to know the equa- 
tions, but not what they mean: so long as they lead to the same 
results as regards percepts, all interpretations are equally 
legitimate. Let us take an example. Suppose we have a set 
of propositions about an electron which we will call E. Accord- 
ing to the subject-predicate logic, and according to the view 
that matter is a substance, there is a certain entity E which is 
mentioned in all statements about this electron. According 
to the view which resolves an electron into a series of events, 
the propositions in question will be differently analyzed. 
Assuming a certain schematic simplicity, we might set the 
matter out as follows: there is a certain relation R which 
sometimes holds between events, and when it holds between 
* and y, x and y are said to be events in the biography of the 
same electron. If * belongs to the field of R, ” the electron 
to which X belongs ” will mean the relation R with its field 
limited to terms belonging to the /?-family of x] and the R- 
family of x consists of x together with the terms which have 
the relation Rtox and the terms to which x has the relation R. 
" This electron ’’ will mean “ the electron to which this belongs.” 
” An electron ” will mean " a series such that there is an x 
such that the series is the electron to which x belongs.” In 
order to mention some particular electron, we must be able to 
mention some event connected with it, e.g. the scintillation 
when it hits a certain screen. Thus, instead of sa5nng " the 
event z happened to the electron E ” we shall say " the event 
X happened to the electron to which x happened," or, more 
simply, “ X belongs to the f?-fanuly of The formal proper- 
ties of the propositional function " x belongs to the /?-{amily 



PARTICULARS AND EVENTS 


of X " (R being constant) are the same as those of " x belongs 
to the electron If we want any two electrons to be 
mutually exclusive, in the sense that no event can happen to 
both, we can insure it by assuming that if x has the relation 
R (or the converse relation) to both y and x, then y belongs 
to the i2-family of x. If we do not want this, we do not make 
this assumption about R. It is because of the identity in 
formal properties that the one propositional function can be 
substituted for the other. Whenever we suggest a new view 
as to structure, we have to make sure that it does not falsify 
any of the old formula:, though it may give them a new inter- 
pretation. 

Another illustration, more purely logical, may be useful. 
It seems natural to say that any given shade of colour is a 
quality, i.e. that when we say “ this is red,” we are saying 
that " this ” has a characteristic which we cannot express 
otherwise than by a predicate — ^assuming, for the moment, 
that " red ’’ stands for just one shade of colour. But although 
this may be the right view, there is no logical necessity for 
supposing that it is. We might define one shade of colour as 
“ all the coloured surfaces which have exact colour-similarity 
to a given surface.” Thus " this has the colour C ” is replaced 
by " this is one of the class of entities that have exact 
crfour-similarity with x”; and “ C is a colour” will be re- 
placed by ” C is the class of all entities having exact colour- 
similarity with aj given entity,” In this case, no facts can be 
conceived which would give reason for preferring one form 
of statement to the other, since any ascertainable fact can be 
interpreted equally well on either theory. 

We have, in fact, something more or less analogous to the 
arbitrariness of co-ordinates in the general theory of relativity. 
Provided our s)nnbols have the same interpretation when they 
apply to percepts, their interpretation elsewhere is arbitrary, 
since, so long as the formulae remain the same, the structure 



PARTICULARS AND EVENTS 289 

asserted is the same whatever interpretation we give. Struc- 
ture, and nothing else, is just what is asserted by formulae in 
which the meaning of the terms is unknown, but the purely 
logical symbols have definite meanings (see Chapter XVII.). 
Even the purely logical symbols are arbitrary to a certain 
limited extent, as we saw in the above example of colours. 
But often, when facts from different regions have to be brought 
into connection, one interpretation is much simpler than 
another. Often, also, one interpretation involves less inference 
than another, and is therefore less likely to be wrong. These 
are the main motives governing any suggested interpretation 
of the symbols which occur in mathematical physics. 


19 



CHAPTER XXVIII 

THE CONSTRUCTION OF POINTS* 

The subject of this chapter is one which has been treated with 
wonderful ingenuity by Dr Whitehead, to whom is due the 
whole conception of a method which arrives at " points " as 
systems of finitely-extended events. In advocating this 
method, it is not necessary to maintain that mathematical 
points are impossible as simple entities (or “ particulars ”) ; aU 
that it is necessary to maintain is that we have no good ground 
for regarding them as such. What we know about points is 
that they are useful technically — so useful that we must seek 
an interpretation of the propositions in which, symbolically, 
they occur. But there is no ground for denying structure to 
a point ; on the contrary, there are two grounds for assigning 
structure to a point. One is the familiar argument of Occam’s 
razor: we can make structures having the mathematical 
properties of points, amd to suppose that there are points in 
any other sense is an inference which is useless to science and 
not warranted by any principle, logical or scientific. The 
other argument is much more difficult to state, but the more 
one studies logical construction the more weight one feels 
inclined to attach to it. It rests upon a maxim which might 
be enunciated as a supplement to Occam’s razor: “ What is 
logically convenient is likely to be artificial." To me per- 
sonally, the first example of this maxim was the definition 
of real numbers. Mathematicians found it convenient to 
suppose that all series of rationals have limits, while never- 

* In tills chapter and the next, I owe much to the criticism and 
suggestions of Mr M. H, A. Newman of St, John's CoU^, Cambridge, 
who must not, however, be held responsible for their contents; on the 
contrary, I am convince that he could construct a much better theory 
than that which follows. 


2go 



THE CONSTRUCTION OF POINTS 291 

theless some do not have rational limits. They therefore 
postulated irrational limits, supposed to be homogeneous with 
the rationals. Although the method of Dedekind cuts was 
familiar, nobody thought of saying: An irrational is a Dedekind 
cut, or at least its inferior portion. Yet this definition solves 
all difficulties. We have now first ratios (which cannot be 
irrational), then segments of the series of ratios. Segments 
which have a limit are rational, segments which have no limit 
are irrational. The square root of 2 is the class of ratios 
whose square is less than 2. Segments of the series of ratios 
are “ real numbers the series of real numbers has both 
Dedekindian and Cantorian continuity. Thus it is mathe- 
matically convenient ; but its logical structme is more complex 
than that of the series of ratios. The logical analysis of 
mathematics affords many examples of this procedtire, such 
as the construction of " ideal " points, lines, and planes alluded 
to in Chapter XX. 

It will be seen that the phrase “ what is logically convenient 
is artificial ” does not express what is meant with as much 
precision as is to be desired. What we mean is this: Given 
a set of terms having properties which surest certain general 
mathematical (or logical) properties, but are subject to excep- 
tions in regard to these properties, it is a mistake to postulate 
other terms, logically homogeneous with the original set, and 
such as to remove the exceptions; the proper procedure is to 
look for logical structizres composed of the original terms, 
and such that these structures always have the mathematical 
properties in question. It \nll be found that, where the 
assumption of such properties has proved fruitful, this pro- 
cedure is usually possible. 

Starting from events, there are many ways of reaching 
points. One is the method adopted by Dr Whitehead, in 
which we consider *' enclosure-series." Speaking roughly, we 
may say that this method defines a point as all the volumes 



THE CONSTRUCTION OF POINTS 


which contain the point. (The niceties of the method are 
required to prevent this definition from being circular; also 
to distinguish a set of volumes having only a point in common 
from such as have a line or surface in common.) As a piece 
of logic, this method is faultless. But as a method which aims 
at starting with the actual constituents of the world it seems 
to me to have certain defects. Dr Whitehead assumes that 
every event encloses and is enclosed by other events. There 
is, therefore, for him, no lower limit or minimum, and no upper 
limit or maximum, to the size of events. Each of these 
assumptions demands consideration. 

Let us begin with the absence of a lower limit or minimum. 
Here we are confronted with a question of fact, which might 
conceivably be decided against Dr Whitehead, but could not 
conceivably be decided in his favour. The events which we 
can perceive all have a certain duration, i.e. they are simul- 
taneous with events which are not simultaneous with each 
other. Not only are they all, in this sense, finite, but they 
are all above an assignable limit. I do not know what is the 
shortest perceptible event, but this is the sort of question 
which a psychological laboratory could answer. We have 
not, therefore, direct empirical evidence that there is no mini- 
mum to events. Nor can we have indirect empirical evidence, 
since a process which proceeds by very small finite differences 
is sensibly indistinguishable from a continuous process, as the 
cinema shows. Per contra, there might be empirical evidence, 
as in the quantum theory, that events could not have less 
than a certain minimum spatio-temporal extent. Dr White- 
head’s assumption, therefore, seems rash. At the same time, 
there is a confusion to be avoided; space-time may be con- 
tinuous even if there is a lower limit to events. Suppose 
every elementary event filled a fom-dimensional cube, e.g. a 
cubic centimetre lasting for the time that light takes to travel 
a centimetre; and suppose, conversely, that every such four- 



THE CONSTRUCTION OF POINTS 293 

dimensional cube was occupied by an event. The space-time 
of such a world would be continuous, given suitable axioms, 
although events had a minimum. And, conversely, the 
absence of a minimum to events does not insure spatio- 
temporal continuity. The two questions are thus wholly 
distinct. 

I conclude that there is at present no means of knowing 
whether events have a minimum or not; that there never can 
be conclusive evidence against their having a minimum; but 
that conceivably evidence may hereafter be found in favour 
of a minimum. It remains to consider the question of a 
maximum. 

On the question of a maximum to events, the arguments are 
rather logical than empirical. In a certain sense, any series 
of events may be called one event; the Battle of Waterloo, 
for instance, may count as a single occurrence. But in a 
complex event of this sort, there are parts which have spatio- 
temporal and causal relations to each other; no single entity 
devoid of physical structure persists throughout the whole 
period. I mean by this that anything simultaneous with 
everything that happened during the Battle of Waterloo is 
a complex of parts not all simultaneous with each other. 
Whether we are to call such a complex an " event ” or not is 
merely a question of words. But if our object is to exhibit 
the structure of the physical world, it is clear that we must 
distinguish objects having physical structure from such as are 
only component parts of such structures. It is therefore 
convenient to have a word for the latter. The word I shall 
use is " event." But I shall not go so far as to say that an 
“ event ” must have no structrue. I shall assume only that 
any structure which it may have is irrelevant both to physics 
and to psychology; in other words, that its parts, if any, do 
not have scientifically distinguishable relations to other objects. 
When the word " event " is used in this sense, it is plain that. 



THE CONSTRUCTION OF POINTS 


294 

so far as our experience goes, no event lasts for more than 
a few seconds at most. There is no a priori reason why this 
should be the case ; it is merely an empirical fact. But I think 
a phraseology which obscures it can only lead to confusion. 

For the above reasons, I am tmable to accept Dr White- 
head's construction of points by means of enclosure-series as 
an adequate solution of the problem which it is designed to 
solve. This problem is: to discover structures having certain 
geometrical properties, and composed of the raw material of 
the physical world. 

There is another method, which may be called that of 
" partial overlapping.” In my Knowledge of the External 
World, I apphed this method to the definition of instants. 
It is easy to see that it is adequate for this purpose in psy- 
chology, where we have a one-dimensional time-order which 
remains definite in spite of relativity. But in physics it is 
the " point-instant ” that has to be defined, i.e. a completely 
definite position in space-time, not merely in space or merely 
in time. Here the method is only applicable with suitable 
modifications. However, the method must first be explained 
as applied to the one-dimensional psychological time-series. 

We assume that two events may have a relation which I 
will call " compresence,” which means, practically, that they 
overlap in space-time. Take, for instance, notes played by 
different instruments in orchestral music: if one is heard 
beginning before the other has ceased to be heard, the auditory 
percepts of the hearer have “compresence.” If a group of 
events in one biography are all compresent with each other, 
there will be some place in space-time which is occupied by 
all of tlnem. This place wiU be a " point ” if there is no event 
outside the group which is compresent with all of them. We 
may therefore define a " point-instant,” or simply a “ point,” 
in one biography, as a group of events having the following 
two properties: 



THE CONSTRUCTION OF POINTS 


295 


(i) Any two members of the group are compresent ; 

{2) No event outside the group is compresent with every 
member of the group. 

When we pass beyond one dimension, this method is no 
longer applicable. Take, for example, the three circles in the 
accompan5dng figure; each overlaps 
with the other two, but there is no 
region common to all three. If we 
try to remedy this (as I believe we 
can) by starting, in two dimensions, 
with a relation of three events, which 
is to hold when all three have a 
region in common, we are still met 
by difficulties. The three circles a, b, c have a region in 
common, and the shaded area d has a region in common 
with a and b, also with a and c, and also with b and c, yet 
a, b, c and d have no region in common. Therefore if 
events may have queer shapes such as d, our new three- 
term relation will still not enable 
us to define a " point.” 

Since the problem with which 
we are concerned belongs to 
analysis situs, in which we are 
occupied only with such pro- 
perties of figures as are unaffected 
by continuous deformation, we 
cannot simply declare in advance that no events me to 
have odd shapes. But before attempting to deal with this 
difficulty, it will be as well to consider certain points in analysis 
situs, which will show us what are the requisites of a solution 
of our problem. In analysis situs we start with two con- 
ceptions, that of a point, and that of " neighbourhoods of a 
given point ” — the latter being collections of points. Certain 
definitions obtained in this way will be useful. 





296 


THE CONSTRUCTION OF POINTS 


The following definitions are due to Leopold Vietoris.* 

If Af is a set of points, a point p is called a " HAufungs- 
punkt ” of M if in every neighbourhood of p there is a point 
other than p. 

Two collections of points " touch ” each other in a point p 
if p belongs to one collection and is a " Haufungspunkt ’’ of 
the other. 

A set of points M is “ continuous from atob" if it contains 
a and b, and any two parts of it whose sum is M, of which one 
contains a and the other b, touch each other (in at least one 
point). 

A set of points Af is a " Linienstuck ” from a to 6 if it, but 
none of its proper parts, is continuous from a to b. 

Hausdorff t has defined a “ metrical ” space and a “ topo- 
logical *' space in the following terms. 

A " metrical ” space is a manifold such that with any two 
points X, y is associated a real not-negative number xy 
having the following three properties: (a) yx=xy', (b) xy is only 
zero when x and y are identical; (c) xy -^yz is greater than or 
equal to xz.X 

A " topological " space is a manifold whose elements x are 
associated with sub-classes (7, of the manifold such that : 

(A) To every x corresponds at least one 17,, and every i/, 

contains x‘, 

(B) If 17„ V, are both neighbourhoods of x, there is a 

neighbourhood of x, say W^, which is contained in 
the common part of [7, and F, ; 

(C) If y is a member of 17„ there is a neighbourhood of y 

which is contained in 17,; 

(D) Given any two distinct points, there is a neighbourhood 

of the one and there is a neighborhood of the other 
such that the two have no common point. § 

* Steiige Mengen, Monatshafte fflr Mathematik u. Physik., xxxi., 
1921. pp. 173-204. 

t Grundtiige ier Mengmlehre, Leipzig, 1914. 

t Ib.. p. 211. I Ib., p. 213. 



THE CONSTRUCTION OF POINTS 297 

In order to be able to apply the usual methods of limits to a 
topological space, Hausdorff has need of an “ Abzthlbarkeits- 
axiom,” or " denumerative axiom," He gives two such axioms 
(p. 263), of which the first is the weaker, and is for some 
purposes insufficient. The first states that the number of 
neighbourhoods of a given point is never greater than 
the second states that the total number of neighbourhoods of 
aU points is together This second axiom suffices for all 
the usual kinds of argument, without the introduction of any 
metrical ideas. 

P. Urysohn* has shown that every topological space which 
satisfies Hausdorffs second denumerative axiom and has one 
further property (which he calls “ normality ’’f) is metri- 
cizable. 

These are the main points from analysis situs that are 
relevant to the solution of our problem. 

For the present, we are not concerned with metrical pro- 
perties, but only with such as belong to " topological ” spaces. 
In virtue of Urysohn’s theorem, it will be possible to introduce 
a metric if we can construct the right sort of topologicaJ space. 
But when one metric is possible, an infinite number are possible. 
The metric which is actually introduced in theory of relativity 
is introduced for empirical reasons; it uses a quantitative 
relation which might be called degree of causal proximity. 
The existence of this relation is not implied by anything with 
which we are at present concerned. Moreover, the metrical 
manifold which we require in physics is not a " metrical 
space ” according to Hausdorff’s definition given above, since 
interval in relativity does not possess the properties (6) and (c) 

• Zum Metrisationsprohlem, Math. Annalen 94 (1925), pp. 309-315. 
t He defines a topoloucal space as “ normal '* when any two non- 
overlapping closed manifolds A and B can be separated by two non- 
overlapping regions Gji, Gg which respectively contain them and have 
boundary-points. 16 ., p. 310, and Hausdorfi, op. cii., p. 215. A 
“ boundary-point ” of a collection is one which has a neighbourhood 



THE CONSTRUCTION OF POINTS 


298 

which distance possesses in Hausdorff’s definition. However, 
so far as topological considerations are concerned, we may, 
without appreciable inaccuracy, assign to small regions the 
topological properties which belong to a small region of 
Euclidean space lasting for a short time, i.e. to a continuous 
series of small regions of Euclidean space all geometrically 
indistinguishable. 

In analysis situs, both points and neighbourhoods are given. 
We, on the other hand, wish to define our points in terms of 
"events,” where "events ” will have a one-one correspondence 
with certain neighbourhoods. We want our " events ” to corre- 
spond with neighbourhoods which are above a certain minimum 
and below a certain maximum when, at a later stage, the 
empirical metric is introduced. We have to assign to our 
events such properties as will enable us to define the points of 
a topological space as classes of events, and the neighbourhoods 
of the points as classes of points. But we have to remember 
that we do not want to construct merely a topological space : 
what we want to construct is the four-dimensional space-time 
of the general theory of relativity. 

Hie following illustration will serve to introduce the problem. 
Consider a three-dimensional Euclidean numerical space, i.e. 
the manifold of all ordered triads of real numbers {x, y,z), with 
the usual definition of distance. Consider, in this space, all 
the spheres having a given radius and having centres whose 
co-ordinates are rational. Hie number of such spheres is 
Let us define a group of these spheres as “ co-pimctual " if it 
is such that every four chosen out of the group have a common 
region; and let us define a co-punctual group as " punctual ” 
if it cannot be enlarged without ceasing to be co-punctual. 
Hien there is a one-one correspondence between the original 
points of our space and the punctual groups of spheres. Con- 
sequently the punctual groups of spheres form a Euclidean 
space. If the spheres are all distorted in any continuous way, 



THE CXJNSTRUCriON OF POINTS 299 

they will still enable us to construct punctual groups in the 
same way, and the manifold of pimctual groups will still have 
aU the topological properties which are possessed by a three- 
dimensional Euclidean space. Therefore if we are to use this 
method of constructing points out of " events," we shall have 
to assume that, in the resulting space, there is a possible 
metric according to which the points of which a given event is 
a member always form a spherical voliune. Although this is 
expressed in metrical language, it is in reality a topological 
property, since it is imaffected by continuous deformation. 
It must be possible to express it in non-metrical language, 
though I must confess that I lack the necessary skill. 

I propose, therefore, to regard events as occupying regions 
of space-time which, in some possible metric, are spheres so 
far as their space-dimensions are concerned, and between a 
certain maximum and a certain minimum so far as their 
time-dimension is concerned. The region “ occupied ” by 
an event is the class of points of which it is a member. 

As the fundamental relation in the construction of points, 
we take a five-term relation of " co-punctuality,” which holds 
between five events when there is a region common to all of 
them. A group of five or more events is called " co-punctual ” 
when every quintet chosen out of the group has the relation 
of co-punctuality. 

A " point ” is a co-pimctual group which cannot be enlarged 
without ceasing to be co-punctual. 

In order to demonstrate the existence of points so defined, 
it is sufiicient to assume that all events (or at least all events 
co-pimctual with a given co-punctual quintet) can be well 
ordered. If Zermelo’s axiom is true, this must be the case; if 
not, it may involve some limitation as to the number of 
events. I have been led by the arguments, first of Dr H. M. 
Shefier, and then of Mr F. P. Ramsey, to the view that Zer- 
melo’s axiom is true; I am therefore less reluctant than I 



300 


THE CONSTRUCTION OF POINTS 


should have been formerly to assume that events can be well 
ordered. 

To prove that every event is a member of at least one point, 
we proceed as follows — assuming that there are co-pimctual 
quintets. 

Let P be a well-ordered series whose field consists of all 
events ; put 

P={xi.x,. 

Let a, b, c, d, be a co-punctual quintet. If is the only 
event co-punctual with a, b, c, d, then the class whose only 
members are a, b, c, d, yj is a point according to the definition. 
If, on the other hand, there are a;’s other than which are 
co-punctual with a, b, c, d, y^, let y, be the first of them. If no 
X other than y^ and y, is co-pxmctual with a, b, c, d, yi andy,, 
then a, b, c, d, y^ andy, form a point. Otherwise, let y* be the 
first X other than yi andy^ and co-punctual with a, b, c, d,yj.,y,; 
then y, must be later in the P-series than y,. If this process 
comes to an end withy,, then a, b, c, <f,yi,yj, . • • y« together 
form a point. If it does not come to an end with any finite 
n, it may happen that no x outside the series {yl,y^, • • ¦ y,, . . •) 
is co-punctual with a, b, c, d and all they’s; in that case, a, b, c, d 
and these y’s form a point. But if there are *’s other than 
the y’s and co-punctual vrith all of them, let y, be the first of 
them. Then y„ is later in the P-series than any of the finite 
y’s. We proceed in this way as long as possible, using two 
principles: (i) given a series of y's ending with y,, let y„+i 
be the first x in the P-series after y, and co-punctual with the 
group of all the previous y’s; (2) given a series of y’s having 
no last term, take as the next y the first * in the P-series which 
is after all the y’s hitherto selected and co-punctual with all 
of them. If, at any stage, there is no such x, they’s already 
selected form a point. Now this process must end sooner or 
later; for the y’s (other than y,) form an ascending series 



THE CONSTRUCTION OF POINTS 


301 


selected from P, and therefore, sooner or later, there will be no 
*’s later than all the j/’s previously selected. At this stage, 
if not before, a, b, c, d and the y’s already selected will form 
a point. Hence if all events can be well ordered, every event 
is a member of at least one point, provided every event is a 
member of a co-punctual quintet. The proof still holds if we 
only assume that all events co-pimctual with a given quintet 
can be well ordered. 

Given any class of events a, let 2? (a) be the class of those 
events which are co-punctual with a. Then by definition a 
is a point if a=/?(a). The necessary and sufficient condition 
that all the members of a should have a point in common is 
that a should be contained in R{a). This condition is neces- 
sary, for, if d is a point and a is contained in <5, it follows that 
R(d) is contained in R(a), and that S=R(d). so that a is 
contained in R(a). The proof that the condition is sufficient 
is longer; it is as follows. 

If a=2?(a), a is a point. If not, let S{a) denote the part 
of R(a) which is outside a. Using again the P-series of all 
events, put 

Zi=the first member of S(a) in the P-order. 

fi=a together with Zj. 

z,=the first member of S{Ci) in the P-order. 

C*=fi together with z*. 

together with all the finite z’s. 
z«= the first member of S(f„) in the P-order, 

and so on, as long as possible. If precedes z, in the 

P-order. Hence, as before, there must come a stage when 
no fresh z’s can be constructed. If C is the class consisting 
of a together with all the z’s yielded by the method. C is a 
point. For (i) all the quintets in f are co-punctual, by the 
construction; (2) a term co-punctual with all the quartets ol 
f cannot be later than all the f’s, because if there were such 
a term we could construct more z’s; (3) such a term cannot be 



302 


THE CONSTRUCTION OF POINTS 


earlier than some member of f because, if it were, it would 
have been chosen as the z of that stage in the construction ; 
hence no event outside C is co-punctual with every quartet of C. 
Hence C is a point. 

To say that a collection of events have a point in common 
is to say that the collection is part (or the whole) of the class 
which is the point. Conversely, a collection of events may 
contain a sub-class which is a point ; the necessary and sufficient 
condition for this is that R(a) should be contained in a, where 
a is the collection in question. The proof proceeds exactly as 
before, if we now make S(a) mean the part of a which is not 
contained in R{a). 

A group of events a is “ co-punctual ” if a is contained in 
R(a), and a " point ’’ is a co-punctual group which cannot be 
enlarged without ceasing to be co-punctual. 

A few purely logical properties of points may be noted. 
Given any two classes a and fi, if a is contained in then R(fi) 
is contained in R(a). Hence if a and /? are points and a is 
contained in /3, a and fi are identical; for in that case R(fi) and 
R(a) are respectively identical with and a. and therefore 
if a is contained in /J, ^ is contained in a, so that a and fi are 
identical. 

Every co-punctual group of events contains at least one 
point. This has already been proved, since to say that a is a 
co-punctual group is to say that a is contained in 2? (a). 

It may be taken that, in general, there are a number of 
points of which any given event is a member. Such a set of 
points will fill a " region,” but not every region will be the 
set of points to which some one event belongs. This topic, 
however, cannot be dealt with until we have discussed space- 
time order. 



CHAPTER XXIX 

SPACE-TIME ORDER 

In the present chapter I shall show how to develop spatio- 
temporal order, in the sense in which it is assumed by the 
general theory of relativity, without any apparatus beyond 
that of the preceding chapter, except a few h}rpotheses of the 
sort to be expected in founding analysis situs. 

The transformations of co-ordinates which are admissible in 
tensor analysis are not unlimited; they are such, only, as 
leave relations of neighbourhood unchanged.* That is to say, 
a small displacement in one system of co-ordinates must 
correspond to a small displacement in any other. This 
requires that, independently of metrical considerations, the 
events of the space-time manifold should have certain relations 
of order. It must be possible, in certain circumstances, to 
say that A is nearer to B than to C, without presupposing 
any quantitative measure of distance. It must be possible 
to construct lines along which there is a definite order, but it 
must be impossible to distinguish certain lines as " straight." 
A closed curve will be distingui^able from an open curve, but 
two open curves will not be distinguishable from each other, 
provided they have no singularities. Generally, we shall be 
able to make propositions belonging to analysis situs, at any 
rate in a sufficiently small region. But propositions about a 
configuration must, in the geometry we are to construct, be 
only such as would remain true if the configuration were 
subjected to any kind of deformation which does not violate 
continuity. It is this pre-co-ordinate geometry that concerns 
us in the present chapter. 

• For a geometry based on “ neighbourhood," see Hausdorfi, Grund- 
*Agt Aer Mengtnlehre (Leipzig, 1914). chaps, vii. and viii. 

303 



304 SPACE-TIME ORDER 

The order to be introduced is of two sorts, macroscopic and 
microscopic. We will treat first of the former. 

Let us observe, to begin with, that events may be divided 
into zones with respect to a given event. There are first 
those that are compresent with a given event, then those not 
compresent with it, but compresent with an event compresent 
with it, and so on. The «th zone will consist of events that 
can be reached in n steps, but not in » - 1, a “ step ” being taken 
as the passage from an event to another which is compresent 
with it. We will call two points “ connected ” when there 
is an event which is a member of both. The passage from 
event to event by the relation of compresence may be replaced 
by the passage from point to point by the relation of connection. 
Thus points also can be collected into zones. If there is a 
minimum to the size of events, we may assume that it is 
always possible to pass from one event to another by a finite 
number of " steps.” If so, there must be a smallest number 
of steps in which the passage can be made ; thus every event 
will belong to some definite zone with respect to a given event. 
This is useful in the introduction of order, because we can agree 
that the mth zone is to be nearer the origin than the Mth if 
»n<^«, so that it only remains to introduce order among the 
members of a given zone. And even here we only want such 
order as is involved in analysis silus, not such more rigid order 
as is involved, e.g., in projective geometry. 

When an event can be reached from another in n steps but 
not in « - 1, we may regard the intermediate events as forming 
a sort of quantized geodesic route between the two events. 

In virtue of the above division into zones, which can be 
effected with respect to any point as origin, we can define a 
rather small region of space-time by means of four integers, 
representing the number of steps in which any point in the 
region can be reached from four given points. It is only 
within a small region of this sort, therefore, that we need the 



SPACE-TIME ORDER 305 

more delicate methods of microscopic order, to which we shall 
now proceed. 

Given two points >c and X, let us denote by " xX ” their 
logical product, i.e. the events which are members of both, or, 
in geometrical language, the events which contain both. It 
is obvious that, taking the view of events explained at the 
beginning of the preceding chapter, xX will be null unless x and 
X are fairly near together. As already stated, we say that x 
and X are *' connected ” when xX is not null. Microscopic 
order is confined to connected points, at any rate to begin with. 

We now define " X is between >« and ju " as meaning: " x.X.ft 
are points such that xjj, is not null and is a proper part of xX.” 
An equivalent definition is: " x, X, /t are points such that x/j, is 
not null, and is contained in 
X, but xX is not contained in 
At.” By the help of suitable 
axioms, “between,” so de- 
fined, can be made to give 
rise to the spatio-temporal 
order presupposed in assigning co-ordinates in the general 
theory of relativity. What the definition says, in geometrical 
language, is that every event which contains both x and/i 
contains X, but not every event which contains both x and X 
contains /i. 

We must not imagine that all the points between two others 
lie on one line; each lies on some short route joining the end- 
points, a " short ” route being one composed wholly of points 
between the end-points ; but none lies on edl short routes. 

Before developing the formal consequences of this definition, 
it may be as well to consider its geometrical import. In the 
accompan)dng figure, X will be between x and /i if there are 
events which contain all three, but there are none which 
contain x and i* without containing X. (I represent events 
by areas.) Now if events can often be of irregtilar shapes 




3o6 


SPACE-TIME ORDER 


such as that of the shaded area in the figure, it would seem 
that one event is not likely ever to be between two others 
according to the definition. I shall therefore assume that we 
may picture events as free from re-entrant angles and similar 
oddities. I imagine them as all oval; but formally it would 
do just as well if they were all four-dimensional cubes, and it 
would not matter whether they were large or small, provided 
they did not differ too much, and were all above a certain 
minimum. These pictorial requisites are rather for the 
importance of the theory to be developed than for its truth. 
In the preceding chapter, we assumed that events are such 
as to be all spheres according to one possible metric. Form- 
ally, we might equally well have assumed that there is a metric 
in which they are all cubes. Some assumption of this kind, 
as we saw, is necessary for the success of our definition of 
points. The other assumptions needed for its truth will be 
explicitly stated as they are introduced. The assumptions 
introduced so far in this chapter and its predecessor are; 

(1) Compresence is symmetrical. 

(2) Defining “ events ” as the field of compresence, every 

event is compresent with itself. 

(3) Events can be well ordered; or at least those compresent 

with a given event can be. 

(4) Any two events have a relation which is a finite power 

of compresence. (This is required for mapping space- 
time into zones.) In other words, the ancestral 
relation derived from compresence is connected. 

We will now define a set of points as " coUinear ’’ if every 
pair of the set are connected, and every triad a, P, y are such 
that either afi is contained in y, or ay is contained in p. We 
will define a set of points as a " line ” if (i) it is coUinear, 
(2) it is not contained in any larger coUinear group with the 
same extremities. It wiU be seen that this definition is 
analogous to that of points. We may define a set of events 



SPACE-TIME ORDER 


307 


as " co-punctual ” when every quintet of the set are co- 
punctual; and we can then define a set of events as a " point ” 
when (i) it is co-punctual, (2) it is not contained in any larger 
co-punctual group. This way of stating our previous defini- 
tion of " points ” brings out the analogy. 

The “ lines ” that we are defining are not to be supposed 
“ straight"; straightness is a notion wholly foreign to the 
geometry we are developing. Perhaps it might be better to 
call them "routes"; but there is no harm in calling them 
" lines " provided we remember that they are not supposed 
to be straight. For the present, we shall not be concerned 
with lines, but only with collinear groups of points. 

Let us define a set of points as " a-coUinear ” if (i) every 
pair of the set is connected; (2) given any two, (, rj, either f is 
between a or t), or r) is between a and We shall want such 
axioms as will enable us to show that such a set of points is 
collinear, not merely «-collinear, and that their order is 
independent of a. It is obvious that, if we put f before ij 
whenever f is between a and rj, we obtain a serial order of any 
set of points which is a-collinear. But to insure that the 
order shall be independent of a we require the following three 
axioms: 

(1) If a, f, T) are points, and afi is contained in fr?, and atj 
is contained in f, and f and y are distinct, then fir) is not con- 
tained in f. 

(2) If at] is contained in f, and pS is contained in ri, than afi 
is contained in the sum of f and tf, (It follows at once that 
afi is contained in Sij.) 

(3) If op is contained in and oij is contained in then /Jf 
is contained in the sum of a and (It follows at once that 
Pi is contained in 17.) 

The practical effects of these three axioms are : 
a p s 



3o8 


SPACE-TIME ORDER 


(1) If f and *j are between a and fi, and f is between a and 
t}, then f is not between p and n- 

(2) If f is between a and ij, and t] is between P and f , then 
f and Ti are between a and p. 

(3) If T] is between a and P, and { is between a and *7, then 
jj is between p and f . 

From these axioms we can deduce that a set of points which 
is a-coUinear is coUinear. Also that, given a set of a-coliinear 
points, if y is one of them, the points of the set which are 
beyond y from a are y-collinear, and retain the same order 
when arranged with reference to y as they had when arranged 
with reference to a. Also that, if p is one of a set of a-collinear 
points, those of the set which are between a and P are )S-collinear, 

O and have, when arranged with reference to 
1 P, the converse order to that which they 
had when arranged with reference to a. 
These propositions show that we have a 
satisfactory definition of order among the 
points of a coUinear set. 

The above axioms are logicaUy adequate, but regarded 
as asserting physical truths about events they may perhaps 
be regarded as more or less doubtful. We have to remember 
that our lines are not straight, and may therefore return into 
themselves. Routes with very great curvature are, however, 
excluded by our definition of coUinearity. Consider, e.g., 
such a route as that in the accompanying figure. We may 
suppose that a, P, (, r) are all connected, but { and r/ wiU not 
be between a and P according to the definition, because ob- 
viously an event may contain a and p without containing 
f and t). Thus if we wish to regard the above route from 
a to i? as, in some sense, a line, it wiU have to be in an extended 
sense, namely, that it can be divided into a number of smaU 
finite parts, each of which is a line. And a set of points may 
be regarded as coUinear in an extended sense if it is capable 



SPACE-TIME ORDER 


309 

of a serial order such that any sufficiently small consecutive 
stretch of the series is a collinear set — ^provided that such 
stretch must contain not less than four points. 

We can now prove, by the help of one further axiom, that 
any progression of collinear points all lying between two 
points a and /S must have a limit. 

Let our set of points be x= (f^, fj, . . . . . .), all lying 

on a line between a and fi, in an order from a towards p. Let 
a be the sum of all the points in x (i.e. the class of members of 
members of x), and w their product, i.e. the events which 
belong to every member of x. Then & is not null, because afi 
is contained in it, and a, p are connected (in virtue of the 
definition of coUinearity). 

Let xi consist of all the i’s except ( 1 , of all the x^’s except 
I,, etc. Let ffli be the events belonging to all members of xi, 
and generally let be the events belonging to all members 
of X,; and let A be the sum of all the ffi’s. Then A consists of 
all those events which belong to all sufficiently late f’s; i.e. 
to say that an event is a member of A is to say that there is an 
n such that the event is a member of f, „ for all values of m. 

It will be observed that is contained in x„, therefore 
<S„ is contained in <»,+*. It follows that, if z, z’ are two 
members of A, there is an « such that z, z' are both members 
of a)„. Hence they are both members of Hence any 

five members of A are co-punctual, and therefore there is at 
least one point which contains the whole of A, since A is con- 
tained in R(A). 

If there is a limit, say 6, to the series of f’s, we require : 

(1) That i should be beyond all the f’s, i.e. that for every 
n and m we should have <Sf„ contained in i.e. that we 
should have da contained in A; 

( 2 ) That there should be no point beyond all the f’s but 
between them and 6, i.e. that, if i? is any point such that ija 
is contained in A, then ria is contained in 6. 



SPACE-TIME ORDER 


310 

A suf&dent condition is, therefore, 6a=X. If there is a point 
d fulfilling this condition, it is the required limit. 

If there is an event z such that every quartet of A is co- 
punctual with z and every quartet of a which is co-pimctual 
with z is a part of A, then there is a point 6 which contains 
A and has z for a member, and this point will be such that 3or= A, 
so that it will be the required limit. But if there is no such 
event as z, we must proceed differently. 

In this case we need a new axiom, namely : 

If ^ is between a and y, and x is a member of a but not of P, 
then there is a quartet which is contained in ^ and y but is not 
co-punctual with x. 

In the figure, y represents a member of such a quartet. 

Given this axiom, we proceed as follows. 

Since is between jmd /3, 
if X is a member of f, but 
not of {,+ 1 , there is a quartet 
which is contained in ^ and 
but is not co-punctxial 
with X. Now is contained 
in A; therefore there is a quartet which is a part of A but is 
not co-punctual with x. It follows by transposition that if x 
is a member of f* and every quartet of A is co-punctual with x, 
then X is a member of {,^ 1 , It follows that x is a member 
of {, 4 .,, ... so that X is a member of A. Hence, since 

may be any member of x, it follows that any member of a 
which is co-punctual with the whole of A is a member of A. 
Now the terms co-punctual with the whole of A constitute the 
classi2(A). Hence the common part of a and 22 (A) is contained in 
A, and is therefore equal to A, since A is contained m a and in J2 (A). 

Now if <J is a point which contains A, it follows that 6 is 
contained in 22 (A) ; hence ia is contained in A, and is therefore 
equal to A, since A is contained in d and in a. Hence 5 is the 
required limit. 




SPACE-TIME ORDER 


3 « 

It follows from this that a compact series of points contained 
within a stretch of collinear points is continuous. It does not 
follow that there are compact series of points; this would 
require existence-axioms which there is no object in intro- 
ducing, since we do not know whether space-time is continuous 
or not. It is, however, interesting to observe that an initial 
apparatus of k, events suffices to generate a continuous 
space-time of points, by means of the relations of co-punctuality 
and logical inclusion. 

The further development of our geometry, so as to include 
surfaces, volumes, and four-dimensional regions, obviously 
presents no difficulty in principle, and I do not propose to 
enlarge upon it. I will merely observe that it is possible to 
extend the method by which we have defined points and lines 
so as to obtain something which we may call surfaces and 
regions, though not quite in the usual sense. Probably 
various ways of doing this are possible ; the one that I suggest 
is the following. 

A class of lines will be called “ co-superficial ” when any 
two intersect, but there is no point common to all the lines of 
the class. 

A " surface ” is a co-superficial class of lines which caimot 
be augmented without ceasing to be co-superficial. 

A class of surfaces is ‘ ‘ co-regional ’ ’ when any two have a line in 
common, but no line is common to all the surfaces of the class. 

A " region ” is a co-regional class of surfaces which cannot 
be augmented without ceasing to be co-regional. 

It is obvious that this method could be extended to any 
number of dimensions; also that it requires limitations and 
extensions. But it seems uimecessary to pursue the matter 
further, since it is plain that we have what is needed for the 
pre-co-ordinate geometry of space-time. 

Let us now compare our constructed space-time with the 
spatial manifolds of analysis situs. In the preceding chapter 



312 SPACE-TIME ORDER 

we quoted Hausdorff’s definition of a " topological ” space, 
and we saw that, in order to prove the usual propositions about 
limits, it is necessary that the total number of neighbourhoods 
should be Let us now define as a " neighbourhood ” of 
a point X any set of points each of which contains as a sub-class 
a certain finite co-punctual class of events which is a sub- 
class of X. That is to say, if a is a co-punctual class of events 
each of which is a member of x, the set of all the points of which 
a is a sub-class will be a neighbourhood of x. With this 
definition of a " neighbourhood,” it is obvious that our space 
has the four characteristics by which Hausdorfi (/oc. cii., p. 213) 
defines a topological space. In order to insure that our space 
shall also satisfy his second denumerative axiom (loc.cii., p. 263), 
it is necessary and sufiicient to assume that the total number 
of events is With this assumption, the theorems of analysis 
situs become applicable to our space-time manifold of points. 

It remains to say a word on the subject of dimensions. W'e 
have not so far said anything explicit on this subject, though 
our original introduction of co-punctuality as a five-term 
relation could only prove satisfactory in a four-dimensional 
manifold. The most suitable definition of dimensions from 
our point of view is that of Poincar^, which is inductive. He 
defines a space M as one-dimensional if, given any two points 
P, Q, there is an isolated set of points X such that no connected 
part of M-not-A^ contains both P and Q. And he defines a 
space M as «-dimensional if, given any two points P, Q, there 
is an (» - 1) -dimensional set of points X such that no connected 
part of M-not-X contains both P and Q. Using this definition, 
or any other which is purely topological, we set up the axiom 
that our topological space-time is to be four-dimensional.* 
This completes the material required for the topological 
treatment of space-time. 

* For an account of the modem theory of dimensions, see Karl 
Monger, Berickt fiber die Dimensionstheorie, Jahresbericbt der deutschen 
Mathematiker-Vereinigung, 35, pp. 113-150 (1926). 



CHAPTER XXX 

CAUSAL LINES 

The notion of causality has been greatly modified by the 
substitution of space-time for space and time. We may 
define causality in its broadest sense as embracing all laws 
which connect events at different times, or, to adapt our 
phraseology to modem needs, events the intervals between 
which are time-like. Now owing to the fact that the formula 
for <is’ is formally the same for time-hke and for space-hke 
intervals, there is no longer the difference that formerly existed 
between causal and geometrical relations. Geodesics are 
geometrical, but they are also the paths of material particles. 
It is hardly correct to say that a particle moves in a geodesic; 
it is more correct to say that a particle is a geodesic (though 
not all geodesicis are particles) . To say that a particle moves in 
a geodesic is to use language appropriate to the conception of a 
space which persists through time, involving the notion of a 
position which may be occupied either at one time or at another. 
We think, for example, that it is possible to move from A to B 
or from B to A; but such a view is incompatible with the 
theory of space-time. According to that theory, every 
position of a body has a date, and it is impossible to occupy 
the same position at einother date, since the date is one of the 
co-ordinates of the position. When we travel from A to B, 
the date is continually advancing; the return journey, having 
different dates, does not cover the same route. Thus geometry 
and causation become inextricably intertwined. 

Dr A. A. Robb has laid stress upon the fact that, when two 
events have a space-like interval, there can be no direct causal 
relation between them. This means that, given two such 
events A and B, if any inference is possible from the one to 
313 



CAUSAL LINES 


3M 

the other, it must be by way of a common causal ancestor. 
Two men may see the sun at the same moment, so that the 
interval between their percepts is space-like; the inference 
that so-and-so is seeing the sun now arises from our knowledge 
of radiation, and requires that we should trace his percept and 
our own to a common ancestry in the sun. We may therefore 
distinguish time-like and space-like intervals by saying that 
the former occur where there is some direct causal relation, 
while the latter occur where both events are related to a 
common ancestor or a common descendant. And possibly 
the magnitude of the interval may be derivable from the 
magnitude of the causal relation. But if this is to be possible, 
it will be necessary to achieve considerable precision as to what 
we mean by causal relations. 

As we saw in Part II., perception as a source of knowledge 
concerning physical objects would be impossible if there were 
not, in the physical world, semi-independent causal chains, or 
causal lines as we may caU them. The light which comes 
to us from a printed page retains the structure of the page; 
if it did not, reading would be impossible. The retention is 
only approximate; it ceases at a distance from the book. 
And it ceases within the eye if we have defective vision. But 
where there is such failure, perception ceases — or rather, it 
fades away as the failure to preserve structure increases. 
Thus it is essential to perception as a source of knowledge that 
there should be in the world causal series which are, within 
limits, independent of the rest of the world. 

Another point concerning causation emerges from the con- 
sideration of perception. A number of simultaneous per- 
cepts— e.g. the letters of a word which we read at a glance- 
are to be regarded as " co-punctual " in the sense of our two 
preceding chapters. Each of these percepts has its own 
causal antecedents, different from those of the other percepts. 
It is true that there may be mutual nM>di6cation— «.g. a 



CAUSAL LINES 


315 


colour looks different in the neighbourhood of another colour 
from what it looks against a dark background. But this is 
recognized as " modification," i.e. as effecting a change from 
a norm, which must remain within limits if perception is to 
be successful. Thus the percipient is the meeting-place of a 
number of more or less independent causal series — as many, 
at least, as there are distinguishable elements in his total 
momentary perceptual field. But although these l,ines have 
converged upon him more or less independently, the totahty 
of his percepts now becomes a caus2Ll unit, as is seen in mnemic 
phenomena. Given a number of simultaneous percepts, a 
percept very similar to one of them, occurring on a future 
occasion, recalls something similar to the others, or at least 
may do so; here the co-punctuality of the percepts is essential 
to the character of their total effect. 

In the physical world, the same sort of thing must be 
supposed to occur, though to a less striking degree. According 
to the theory of Chapter XXVIII., any event in the physical 
world occupies a finite region of space-time, whose finiteness 
consists in the fact that the said event is compresent with 
events which are not compresent with each other. On the 
analogy of mnemic phenomena, a group of co-p\mctual events 
may have effects which would have been impossible if the 
events had not been co-punctual. That is the reaison why 
physics is compelled to resort to points in stating its causal 
laws. Until we have a complete group of co-punctual events, 
i.e. a point, we cannot be quite sure as to the effect which will 
follow from any one of the events; such knowledge as we can 
have will be more or less approximate. 

It is these two opposite laws, of approximately separable 
causal lines on the one hand, and interactions of co-pimctual 
events on the other, which make the warp and woof of the 
world, both physical and mental. In this chapter, I want to 
attain more precision as to the separable causal lines. 



CAUSAL LINES 


316 

The possibility of perception, as we have seen already, 
depends upon the occurrence in the physical world of processes 
which may be called " radiations,” provided the word is used 
somewhat more widely than is customary. The processes 
commonly called radiations are, naturally, the most perfect 
examples. In these, when they are imdisturbed, we have a 
condition of some kind which spreads outward from a centre, 
changing in an apparently continuous maimer as it travels. 
Something may be met with on the way which alters the law 
of chJinge, or even stops the radiation in some direction 
altogether ; but in the absence of obstacles the process proceeds 
according to its own intrinsic laws. The public senses — sight, 
hearing, and smell — depend upon radiations, in a generalized 
sense in the case of smell. Bodily senses, including touch, are 
more analogous to electric currents in their maimer of propaga- 
tion: they travel along nerves, but not through air or empty 
space. The public senses, also, travel along nerves, but the 
disturbance in the nerves is a prolongation, with alterations, 
of a process in the world outside the percipient’s body, which 
is not the case with the bodily senses. It is owing to the 
existence of radiations that we live in a common world, since 
this depends upon the fact that neighbouring percipients 
receive similar stimuli at about the same time. The physical 
accoimt of radiations is, however, very different in different 
cases. In the case of smell, the emission theoiy is universally 
accepted: we smell a body because portions of it travel from 
it to the nose. In the case of sound, only a process, not actual 
matter, is transmitted, but the process is in matter. In the 
case of light, if we accept the imdulatory theory, the process 
consists of a transverse vibration, which may be said to be 
in the aether if that brings comfort to the speaker, but is 
certainly not in ordinary matter. If we could accept the 
light-quantum theory, we should still suppose that there is 
some periodic process, such that the action during one period 



CAUSAL LINES 317 

is h (Planck’s constant); the light consists of (so to speak) 
atoms, each of which is such a process. There is a great 
difference of physical importance between these three cases 
of smeU, soimd, and light; the first is quite unimportant 
physically, the second a somewhat late development from 
more fundamental principles, the third a corner-stone of 
physical theory. 

In the ideal case of a radiation, a few observations should 
suffice to determine its centre, and then, its laws being known, 
we could infer the whole connected system of events which 
constitutes it, in so far as the events enter into physical laws. 
The case of light from a fixed star very nearly realizes the 
ideal. The places in the universe where the light encounters 
obstacles are very few, though unfortunately they include the 
places where we live. It is because this example of light in 
vacuo is so nearly perfect that we know as much as we do about 
astronomy. 

Radiation independent of matter, however, is only one 
form of causal process in the physical world. Apart from 
quantum changes, there are at least two others which are of 
great importance: one is the motion of matter, and the other 
is the transmission of a process by matter. The difference 
involved is essentially one as to causal laws: one sort of causal 
connection between events makes us regard them as part of 
the history of one piece of matter, while another does not, 
but there is no more intimate connection between an electron 
at one time and the same electron at another time than between 
two parts of one light-ray. Let us consider for a moment the 
nature of the causal laws which define one piece of matter. 

One prima facie difference is that the propagation of light 
is spherical (or conical, in the case of a directed beam), whereas 
the motion of matter is linear. The history of a piece of 
matter is a " world-line"; the history of a light-wave is not. 
This difference may no longer exist if some adaptation of the 



3r8 CAUSAL LINES 

light-quantum theory can be made satisfactory; but, if so, we 
shall feel that the difference between light and matter has been 
much diminished. Another difference is the relative inde- 
structibility of matter. One form of energy changes into 
another, but the energy represented by the proper mass of an 
electron or proton is not known to change into other forms, 
and apparently never does so under terrestrial conditions: it 
does not radiate at all in any circumstances that we can 
produce or observe. Then there is the fact that the velocity 
of a body relative to any observer is always less than that of 
light. But in spite of the doubt as to light-quanta, the main 
feature of the causal laws that constitute matter seems to be 
their linear rather than spherical character. It is this that 
enables us to locate a given piece of matter at a given time. 
The light emitted by a flash is, at a given moment, diffused 
over the surface of a sphere, but an electron is as concentrated 
at one time as at another, and does not tend to spread itself 
out. A unit of matter may, therefore, be appropriately 
defined as a " causal line." 

Before pursuing this subject, however, it will be well to 
dispose of the other kind of causal process which we mentioned 
just now, namely the transmission of a process by matter. 
This is itself of two sorts, one illustrated by sound, the other 
by the conduction of an electric current. In the case of sound 
we have a radiation ; in the other case we have a more or less 
linear process. In each case, however, actual pieces of matter 
move, and cause others to move. The former belongs to the 
notion of a " causal line,” to which we shall return in a moment. 
The latter belongs to the causal laws as to the interactions of 
different pieces of matter, which I do not wish to consider 
tmtil I have elicited the intrinsic causal laws which constitute 
the definition of one piece of matter. These, as we saw, have 
been somewhat obscured by the notion of substance, which 
made it plausible to take lor granted certain connections 



CAUSAL LINES 


319 


between events at different times, which, for us, are causal, 
and demand explicit recognition. It is these intrinsic laws 
which replace substance that I wish to consider now, leaving 
the interactions between different pieces of matter for a later 
stage. 

What, then, constitutes a " causal line ” ? In other words, 
what constitutes one electron ? Before asking ourselves what 
makes us call an electron at one time the same as an electron 
at another time, it may be weU to ask ourselves : What con- 
stitutes an electron at one time ? 

We must find some reality for the electron, or else the 
physical world will nm through our fingers like a jelly-fish. 
There is the same sort of reason, however, for not regarding an 
electron as an ultimate particular as there was for refusing 
this status to a space-time point. The electron has very con- 
venient properties, and is therefore probably a logical structure 
upon which we concentrate attention just because of these 
properties. A rather haphazard set of particulars may be 
capable of being collected into groups each of which has very 
agreeable smooth mathematical properties; but we have no 
right to suppose Nature so kind to the mathematician as to 
have created particulars with just such properties as he would 
wish to find. We have, therefore, to ask oxirselves: Can we 
construct an electron out of events, in the same sort of way in 
which we constructed space-time points ? To this inquiry we 
must now address ourselves, confining ourselves, at first, to 
the electron at one time. 

When I speak of “ electrons ” in this discussion, I shall 
include “ protons,” since everything that is to be said about 
the one is to be said about the other also. 

We do not know much about the contents of any part of the 
world except our own heads; our knowledge of other regions, 
as we have seen, is wholly abstract. But we know our per- 
cepts, thoughts, and feeUngs in a more intimate fashion. 



320 


CAUSAL LINES 


Whoever accepts the causa] theory of perception is compelled 
to conclude that percepts are in our heads, for they come at the 
end of a causal chain of physical events leading, spatially, 
from the object to the brain of the percipient. We cannot 
suppose that, at the end of this process, the last effect suddenly 
jumps back to the starting-point, like a stretched rope when 
it snaps. And with the theory of space-time as a structure of 
events, which we developed in the last two chapters, there is 
no sort of reason for not regarding a percept as being in the 
head of the percipient . I shall therefore assume that this is the 
case, when we are speaking of physical, not sensible, location. 

It follows from this that what the physiologist sees when he 
examines a brain is in the physiologist, not in the brain he is 
examining. What is in the brain by the time the physiologist 
examines it if it is dead, I do not profess to know; but while 
its owner was alive, part, at least, of the contents of his brain 
consisted of his percepts, thoughts, and feelings. Since his 
brain also consisted of electrons, we are compelled to conclude 
that an electron is a grouping of events, and that, if the 
electron is in a human brain, some of the events composing it 
are likely to be some of the “ mental states ” of the man to 
whom the brain belongs. Or, at any rate, they are likely to 
be parts of such “ mental states ” — for it must not be assumed 
that part of a mental state must be a mental state. I do not 
wish to discuss what is meant by a “ mental state ” ; the main 
point for us is that the term must include percepts. Thus a 
percept is an event or a group of events, each of which belongs 
to one or more of the groups constituting the electrons in the 
brain. This, I think, is the most concrete statement that can 
be made about electrons; everything else that can be said is 
more or less abstract and mathematical. 

We have arrived at the conclusion that am electron at am 
instant is a grouping of events; the question is: what sort 
of group is it ? Obviously it includes all the events that 



CAUSAL LINES 


321 


happen where the electron is. If we may regard the electron 
as a material point, the events constituting an electron will 
have the two characteristic properties of points, viz. any five 
are co-punctual, and not all sub-classes of four events are 
co-punctual with any event outside the group. I do not know 
whether there is any valid ground for supposing that an 
electron is of finite size; none of the usual arguments seem at 
all conclusive, since they only show the forces developed in 
the neighbourhood of an electron. However, it is usual to 
assume a finite size, and for us the matter is one of indifference. 
If we assume a finite size, the events belonging to the electron 
can be grouped into many points, not only into one; in this 
case, the electron is a group of points, i.e. a class of classes of 
events. It will save circumlocution to speak of the electron 
as a point, and leave it to the reader to make the necessary 
verbal alterations for adaptation to the h)^thesis of finite 
size. But it should be remembered that in Heisenberg’s 
theory the electron is neither a point nor of finite size, since 
ordinary spatial conceptions are inapplicable to it. For the 
moment, we will, however, confine ourselves to the older 
theory of the electron. 

If the electron is a point, it is a material point, and thus 
differs from points in empty space. This difference, I believe, 
does not consist in anything characteristic of the electron at an 
instant, but in its causal laws. What distinguishes a material 
point from a point of empty space-time is that we can recognize 
a series of earlier and later materieil points as all parts of the 
history of one electron. In the Newtonian theory, one could 
say the same of a point of absolute space ; but with the abandon- 
ment of absolute space we have become unable to regard a 
point at one time as in any sense the same as a point at 
another time, except in the case of a material point. The 
existence of this connection may be taken as the definition of 
" matter ” ; and obviously the connection is causal. 



322 


CAUSAL LINES 


In order to develop this further, we must return to the view 
suggested in connection with perception, that events occur, 
usually, in groups arranged about centres. These centres 
may be taken to be places where there is matter. It is found 
that, given events arranged about a centre at one time, there 
are generally similar events arranged about neighbouring 
centres at slightly earlier or later times. By taking the centre 
very small, and by continually diminishing the time-like 
interval concerned, this statement can be made more and 
more nearly true; in the limit, when stated in the language 
of differentials, it may be exactly true, except where quantum 
phenomena are concerned. In their case, continuity is not 
the criterion, at least not continuity in all respects. There is 
continuity in some respects, and in others there is a jump of a 
definite amount connected with the quantum theory. This 
case shows, however, that continuity is not the essence of 
material identity; the essence is inferribility of a group of 
phenomena at one time from a group at another, when both 
groups are arranged about centres.* The time must be very 
short, and the inference is only approximate, except in the 
limit, as the time tends towards zero. Moreover, the time of 
the group is not any of the times at which the several members 
of the group occur, but the calculated time at which the group 
began to be propagated from the centre. The centre is ‘ ‘ where 
the piece of matter is,” and the route of the piece of matter is 
determined by the differential equations which result from the 
above principle. But as to what are the actual events at the 
centre, we know nothing except what follows from the fact 
that our percepts and “ mental states " are among the events 
which constitute the matter of our brains. 

Thus each material imit is a causal line whose neighbouring 

* In this case, however, ii Heisenberg is right, we cannot identify 
an electron at one time with an electron at another. This would be a 
difficulty if an e^tron were conceived as a substance, but for us it is 
merely an empirical limitation of the empirical conception of a causal 



CAUSAL LINES 


3*3 


points are connected by an intrinsic differential law. The 
simplest form of such a law is the first law of motion, from 
which it follows that if a body covers a given distance in a very 
short time, it will cover a very nearly equal distance in the 
next very short time. I conceive — though this is conjectural 
— that, given any event an5nvhere in space-time, there is 
usually some qualitatively very similar event in a neighbouring 
place in space-time, and that, if there is any measurable 
relation between the two events, the " velocity ” of the change 
varies continuously, so that at a third neighbouring point 
there will be an event differing from the second by very nearly 
the same amount as that by which the second differed from 
the first, provided the interval between the second and 
third points is equal to that between the first and second. 
This, together with the fact that events can be grouped about 
centres by the sort of laws which we have called " perspective," 
seems to explain the utility of matter in stating the causal 
laws of the physical world. But there is need of caution 
owing to quantum phenomena, as explained in the preceding 
paragraph. Continuity is the rule, but it may have excep- 
tions. So long as the exceptions are subject to ascertainable 
laws, they do not make the whole system impossible. 

So far, I have said nothing about extrinsic causal laws, i.e. 
those which we naturally regard as exemplifying the influence 
of one piece of matter upon another. Einstein’s theory of 
gravitation has thrown a new light upon these; but this is 
matter for a new chapter. 



CHAPTER XXXI 
EXTRINSIC CAUSAL LAWS 

I MEAN by an “ extrinsic ” causal law any formula in which 
one piece of matter is mentioned as concerned in the behaviour 
of another. Newtonian gravitation afforded a perfect example 
of an extrinsic causal law, but Einsteinian gravitation, pt',nia 
facie, does not. The question I want to consider is : Can we, 
in the last analysis, dispense with such laws altogether, and 
regard each piece of matter as completely self-determined ? 
Or must we admit them, and, if so, in what form ? And what 
are we to say of such matters as the emission and absorption 
of light ? 

Let us first consider Einsteinian gravitation. The theory 
consists in ascribing to every region of space-time a metrical 
structure which is obtained (roughly speaking) by super- 
posing a number of structures which are symmetrical about 
centres, the centres being portions of matter; and, given the 
structure, each piece of matter moves in a geodesic, or rather 
is a geodesic. It is not very easy to see what this means when 
it is translated from the technical language of theoretical 
physics into the language of groups of events. Nevertheless, 
we must make the attempt. 

To begin with; Can we make " matter ’* into a mere law 
according to which events occiu: in the places where there is 
no matter ? This question is analogous to that of phenomen- 
alism as discussed in Chapter XX. We there considered the 
possibility of explaining unperceived " things ” as laws con- 
cerning the behaviour of perceived " things.” Similarly we 
might take events which occur in empty space, and find that 
they were subject to laws symmetrical about centres, and 



EXTRINSIC CAUSAL LAWS 325 

define each such law as a piece of matter situated at the centre. 
Conversely, we might regard the supposed events in empty 
space as mere laws connecting events in different pieces of 
matter; this becomes phenomenalism if we confine the pieces 
of matter to human brains. There are many possible ways 
of turning some things hitherto regarded as “ real ” into mere 
laws concerning the other things. Obviously there must be a 
limit to this process, or else all the things in the world will 
merely be each other’s washing. But the only obvious final limit 
is that set by phenomenalism — ^perhaps one ought to say, 
rather, that set by solipsism. If we have once admitted 
unperceived events, there is no very obvious reason for picking 
and choosing among the events which physics leads us to infer. 

This argument, however, hardly warrants us in assuming 
events inside an electron. If we assume an electron of the 
Rutherford type, we shall have to say that, if an5dhing does 
take place inside the electron, we can know nothing about 
it. No physical process passes through the electron, so that 
the inside, if it exists, is a prison from which nothing can 
escape. No event inside an electron can be compresent with 
an event outside it ; consequently, according to the theory of 
Chapter XXIX. , no line can cross the boundary of an electron. 
What goes on inside, if anything does, is irrelevant to the rest 
of the universe, and is not really in the same space-time as 
what goes on outside. Now the world of physics is intended 
to be a causally interconnected world, and must be sudi if it 
is not to be a groundless fairy tale, since our inferences depend 
upon causal laws. Therefore if anything occurs which is 
causally isolated, we cannot include it in physics. We have 
no ground whatever for saying that nothing is causally 
isolated, but we can never have ground for saying: Such- 
and-such a causally isolated event exists. The physical world 
is the world which is causally continuous with percepts, 
and what is not so continuous lies outside physics. Thus if 



326 EXTRINSIC CAUSAL LAWS 

anything occurs inside an electron, such an occurrence does 
not belong to the world of physics. It would seem to follow 
that, if the electron is to have a definite position in space-time, 
it must be either a point or a hole. The former, however, is 
ph}reically unsatisfactory, and the latter seems scarcely 
capable of an intelligible interpretation. Thus the Ruther- 
ford type of electron raises problems, however we may 
interpret it. 

The Heisenberg electron offers a way out of these difficulties. 
This electron is not in a definite place, and nothing happens 
inside it. It is essentiaUy a collection of radiations observable 
in other places than that in which the electron would formerly 
have been said to be. Thus the electron is reduced to a law 
as to occurrences in a certain region. We cannot say, on this 
view, that the electron is a point, or that it is a certain finite 
region, or that it is a hole; it is, so to sjjeak, something of a 
different logical type, connected with a region through the 
fact that the radiations concerned have diminishing intensity 
as we pass away from this region, but not capable of accurate 
correlation with either a region or a point. Thus on this view 
matter consists merely of laws as to occurrences in “ empty ” 
space. 

Owing to the fact that an electron at one time cannot be 
identified with an electron at another time where quantum 
changes have intervened, the conception of motion loses its 
definiteness where electrons are concerned. This, however, 
only raises difficulties when we are concerned with very minute 
phenomena, such as those which occur within an atom. For 
large-scale phenomena, such as those with which astronomy 
is concerned, we may still regard the electron as persisting and 
as moving in space-time. 

We can now return to the Einsteinian theory of gravitation, 
which necessitated this long digression. According to this 
theory, each electron is associated with a crinkle, which grows 



EXTRINSIC CAUSAL LAWS 327 

less marked as we get away from the electron, but extends 
theoretically throughout space. The actual metrical structure 
of space-time in any region is obtained (roughly speaking) by 
superposing these crinkles. Now the metrical properties of 
space-time are nothing but a method of stating causal laws. 
In the case of gravitation, these laws have to do with the way 
in which the movement of one electron is connected with the 
positions of the others. We must suppose that the formula 
for interval represents something in the state of affairs at each 
place, and that bodies left to themselves move in geodesics, and 
that, so long as electromagnetic phenomena are left out of 
account, the formula for interval at any place is found approxi- 
mately by superposing a number of spherically symmetrical 
formulae, each of which corresponds to an electron in its 
central region. It is naturad to ask, at this point, whether 
interval has any more physical reality than force. But I do 
not wish to raise this question yet, as I propose to consider it 
in later chapters. For the present we may say (a) that we can 
recognize peculiar regions in space-time, which are those that 
would naturally be regarded as in the immediate neighbour- 
hood of matter; (6) that the formula for interval at any place 
is a function of the geodesic distances from that place to 
neighbouring pieces of matter; (c) that pieces of matter travel 
along geodesics. 

The question whether, in such a theory, there is " action at 
a distance ” is really one of words. The formula by which we 
determine what will happen in a given region will contain 
references to distant regions, and it may be said that this is aU 
we can mean by " action at a distance.” To mean more, it 
may be said, is to regard causality as something more than 
correlation, which there can be no reason for doing. If what 
happens in one place is correlated with what happens in 
another, we may be told, nothing more could be imagined in 
the way of action at a distance. But this is not quite what 



EXTRINSIC CAUSAL LAWS 


328 

in fact occurs. What happens in one place is not correlated 
with whai happens in another place, but with another place, 
which is a different thing. Different neighbourhoods have 
different characters, and the differences can be represented by 
a combination of formulae which are spherically s3Tnmetrical. 
This is not action a/ a distance, but action according to a 
distance ; there is nothing that can properly be called am effect 
of one thing upon another at a distance from it. Thus so far, 
pending the discussion of interval, we have found nothing that 
can properly be described as an extrinsic causal law. 

Electromagnetic phenomena, if we accept Weyl’s theory, 
wiU not differ importantly, so far as our present question is 
concerned, from gravitation. An electromagnetic field will 
be represented by gauge-relations between points in a neigh- 
bourhood, and there will be no groimd for supposing that one 
piece of matter influences another; all that we can say is that 
a piece of matter corresponds to a metrical state of affairs 
which makes the geodesics different from what they would 
otherwise be. The motion of an electron or proton is then due 
to the peculiarities of the metrical state of affairs where it is, 
not to something even so near as the hydrogen nucleus is to its 
planetary electron. 

But what are we to say of the emission and absorption of 
light ? It is clear that whenever we perceive hght we absorb 
it, that is to say, the energy in the waves of light (or light- 
quanta ?) that hit the eye is transformed into a different kind 
of energy, though I should not venture to say what kind. 
Therefore all visual percepts involve this process of absorbing 
light. And if perception can ever be a source of knowledge 
as to things outside the percipient's body, there must be causal 
laws connecting what happens to the percipient with what 
goes on outside. It is, of course, obvious that there are such 
laws; we cannot revive Leibniz’s windowless monads. The 
process of absorption and emission of light will serve as a 



EXTRINSIC CAUSAE LAWS 


329 


Special case, about which we have considerable knowledge, 
in which we can hope to anal}^e exactly what occurs. 

Let us take, for simplicity, two hydrogen atoms, of which one 
emits energy which the other absorbs. But for the theory of 
quanta, and such phenomena as the photo-electric effect, a 
supposition of this sort would be impossible. If the energy 
radiated from a hydrogen atom in the form of light really has 
the shape of a spherical wave, it is impossible that the whole 
of it should be absorbed by one other atom, any more than the 
whole of the light radiated from the sun can fall on the earth. 
But if the light emitted by a single atan travels in a straight 
line (approximately), like a material particle, then it may 
happen to hit one atom and be absorbed whole, just as Jonah 
might have been swallowed by another whale. We shall have 
to suppose, in this case, that the spherical distribution of light 
round a radiating body is a statistical phenomenon, like bullets 
fired from a fort in all directions. This suggests the hypo- 
thesis which we have already considered in Chapter XIII., 
according to which nothing at all happens between the emission 
of light by one body and its absorption by another. In that 
case, empty space collapses just as the electron did, and only 
the surface of the electron remains. This, however, seems 
hardly a tenable view. The intervening space might be 
described as non-existent from a metrical point of view, since 
the interval between the emission and the absorption of a light- 
ray is zero ; but from an ordinal point of view this is not the case, 
since, if A and B are two points on a light-ray, we can dis- 
tinguish the case in which the ray goes from .4 to B from that 
in which it goes from B to A. This difference can be stated 
in metrical terms. For example: Let us take eis our time 
co-ordinate the proper time of no matter what body; whatever 
body we choose, A will be earlier than B, or else, whatever 
body we choose, B will be earlier than A. Again: Suppose 
that at A and B there are mirrors, which reflect part of the 



330 


EXTRINSIC CAUSAL LAWS 


ray in such a way that an observer 0 sees both reflected rays. 
Hien either every such observer will see the reflection from A 
before that from B, or else every such observer will see the 
reflection from B before that from A. We can free this from 
dependence on an observer by the following method of state- 
ment: Let be a point on the ray reflected from A, and B' a 
point on the ray reflected from B, so chosen that the interval 
between A' and B' is time-like. Then, however A’ and B' 
may be chosen, either A' is always before B', or B' is always 
before A'. This is stated in the language of the special theory', 
but it is still valid, mutaiis mutandis, in the general theory. 
Thus when we say that the interval between two points on 
a light-ray is zero we are not denying that there is an important 
sense in which one is earlier than the other, and in which one 
can be regarded as cause and the other as effect. This suggests 
that the zero interval is not quite so significant as it might 
seem to be, and I cannot therefore accept the view that there 
are no events along the path of a light-ray in empty space. 

Let us now return to the emission of light, ignoring absorp- 
tion for the present ; and Jet us still consider a single hydrogen 
atom. We are told to suppose that the electron revolves 
about the proton for a certain time, say in a circular orbit 
foim times as large as the minimum orbit; then, suddenly, it 
decides to revolve in the minimum orbit. When this change 
occurs, the atom loses a certain amount of energy, which is 
transformed into light whose frequency is obtained by dividing 
the loss of energy by h (Planck’s constant). Whether the 
light travels only in one direction, or in a spherical wave, we 
are compelled, in the present state of physical knowledge, to 
leave an open question. But we do assume that something 
travels away from the electron, and that, if light is absorbed 
by another atom, that light has traversed a route from its 
place or places of origin. We assume also that the light has a 
frequency, i.e. that what travels is a periodic process. When 



EXTRINSIC CAUSAL LAWS 


331 


the light is absorbed, it ceases to exist as light, although it 
may reappear (in fluorescence). But often its energy exists 
in discoverable forms — chemical forms in chlorophyl, for 
example. When, however, the energy exists in the form of a 
steady motion of the electron in its orbit, it is not discoverable 
until there is a change of orbit. If we had sufficiently powerful 
microscopes, we could see a glowing gas dissolving into a 
comparatively small number of spots of light, while the atoms 
in steady motion would be invisible. Thus we seem to reach 
the conclusion that the causal laws which genuinely connect 
one piece of matter with another are quantum laws, in which 
there are various stages: first, a periodic process having no 
outside effect ; secondly, a sudden disruption of the energy of 
this process into two parts, one being a new periodic process 
in the original body, the other a periodic process travelling in 
empty space; thirdly, the arrival of the travelling process at 
another body ; fourthly, a quantum change in this other body, 
involving absorption of the radiant energy in the production 
of a new steady state in the absorbing body. All genuine 
causal relations between different bodies, we may suppose, 
involve this process of sudden loss of energy by one body and 
its sudden acquisition, later, by another body. The older 
physical laws, as reinterpreted by relativit}', can apparently 
be so stated as to leave bodies independent of each other; but 
I cannot see how the quantum laws can be so stated. 

If one could adopt what may be called the " parcels-post ” 
theory of radiation, according to which, when energy leaves 
an atom, it does so with a definite destination in view, we 
could simplify our account of the matter. In that case, atoms 
would, at most times, live a self-contained life, " the world 
forgetting, by the world forgot." But sometimes they would 
give a parcel of energy to the postman, and sometimes they 
would receive one from him. The postman (who is perhaps 
not a teetotaller) sways from side to side as he travels, and the 



332 EXTRINSIC CAUSAL LAWS 

bigger the parcel the faster he sways. But he travels at the 
same rate whether his parcel is big or small; and he is the 
only link between the atom and the rest of the world. 

For the present, we dare not assume that the question is 
as simple as in the parcels-post illustration. Energy may 
(as the orthodox theory supposes) be lost by radiation into 
the void — ^lost, I mean, not mathematically, but practically. 
The dif&culty is that we cannot put an instrument into the 
void to see what happens there; the attempt is just like trying 
to go and see what things look like from a place where there is 
no eye. All our actual knowledge is concerned with the 
boundary surfaces between matter and empty space: what 
is inside and outside these surfaces is conjectural. I cannot 
help believing that some far simpler logical scheme of physics 
is possible than any yet evolved, and that the simplification 
is most likely to come through giving up the attempt to make 
physical space resemble the space of percepts, of which a 
beginning has been made by the Heisenberg quantum 
mechanics. The theory of space-time developed in Chapters 
XXVIII. and XXIX. was, perhaps, unduly orthodox and 
unimaginative. Perhaps a great deal of apparatus could be 
cut away if we could free ourselves from the belief that we 
must preserve, in physics, characteristics which we find in 
psychological space and time. To this topic I shall devote 
the next chapter. 



CHAPTER XXXII 

PHYSICAL AND PERCEPTUAL SPACE-TIME 

In Part II., when we were considering the transition from 
perception to physics, we took over from common sense 
certain rough-and-ready approximations which, at our present 
stage, we must seek to replace by something more exact. We 
want now to make a second approximation: having inferred 
a certain kind of physical world from our percepts, we can use 
the properties of this inferred world to reinterpret the relation 
of percepts to the outer world, and we can consider more 
carefully whether any of the properties we assigned to the 
outer world were accepted without sufficient reason, merely 
because they were such as we think we find in the perceptual 
world. The subject is imaginatively difficult, and it is not 
easy to disentangle different levels of inference, but it is 
important to do so. 

Starting from percepts, we observe that different people 
have similar percepts, whose differences proceed approximately 
according to the laws of perspective. The first picture of the 
physical world to be derived from a comparison of percepts 
(when we start with a developed logic, not with common sense) 
is, that there are groups of more or less similar events arranged 
about centres; that the first-order laws as to the differences 
between events in one group are spherically symmetrical with 
respect to the centre of the group; and that the second-order 
laws are obtained by combining a number of laws of " dis- 
tortion,” each of which has its own centre. In this picture 
of the world, we use a physical space which is derived from, 
and also correlated with, the space of percepts, in the manner 
explained in discussing phenomenalism in Chapter XX. I 
333 



334 PHYSICAL AND PERCEPTUAL SPACE-TIME 


shall here repeat and amplify this construction, with a view 
to suggesting modifications of it derived from physics. 

We cannot wholly eliminate the subjective factor in our 
knowledge of the world, since we cannot discover experimentally 
what the world looks like from a place where there is no one 
to see it. But we can make the subjective factor approxi- 
nrately constant, and thus be reasonably convinced that the 
differences which remain are due to causes that are not sub- 
jective. I shall therefore suppose that, at a given moment, 
a number of photographs are taken of some object, say a chair 
or a table, from different places, with cameras and plates as 
similar as possible. I shall suppose that the photographs 
are compared by a person sitting motionless, who places them 
successively on a fixed stand in front of him. It is then 
reasonable to assume that the differences between his percepts 
of the photographs are due to physical causes; also, within 
limits, that the likenesses between them are due to likenesses 
in the stimuli to the photographic plates. We find that the 
differences between the photographs proceed according to 
certain laws, which we call the laws of perspective; these laws 
are correlated with the differences between the appeau^nces 
of the different cameras to an observer who sees them all at 
the moment when the photographs are taken, and so on. In 
fact, they can all be expressed as fimctions of the “ co-ordi- 
nates ” of the cameras and the parts of the table, where " co- 
ordinates ’’ may be defined by relation to the single observer. 
E.g. he may get another man to go with one end of a stretched 
tape-measure to each camera in turn, while he holds the other 
end; he can read the length r of the tape-measure, and observe, 
on scales, the angular co-ordinates 0, <p of the tape-measure. 
These facts lead us to attribute a measure of objectivity to our 
co-ordinates, since, although they are all observed by us from 
our pcnnt of view, they determine the sort of photograph that 
a camera will take. Further, they lead us to think that, all 



PHYSICAL AND PERCEPTUAL SPACE-TIME 335 


round the table or chair which is being photographed, there 
are events which are connected with each other according 
to the laws of perspective as stated with reference to a certain 
centre as defined by our polar co-ordinates. Our observer’s 
r, e, q> are facts concerning his own percepts, yet they sufBce 
mathematically to determine the “ percepts ” of the cameras; 
they must therefore have some signihcance which is not purely 
private to him. 

This argument, elaborated and extended in obvious ways, 
gives the ground for supposing that our perceptual space has 
some objective counterpart, i.e. that there is some relation 
between the camera and the table corresponding to the relation 
between the co-ordinates of our percepts of them. (I am 
throughout assuming the causal theory of perception.) If we 
now use one camera to make one photograph containing various 
objects, we shall again find that the spatial relations of the repre- 
sentations of the objects in the photograph are such as can be 
calculated from the co-ordinates of the objects and the camera. 
We cannot know the intrinsic quality of the events at the 
camera which cause the photograph, but we can infer a certain 
similarity of structure between these events and our percept 
of the photograph. All this leads us to the notion of groups 
of events arranged about centres, the centres having to each 
other relations whose causal properties can be inferred from 
relations between certain of our percepts. That is to say, 
given a group G, of which one member is a percept p, and 
another group G', of which one member is a percept p', if r, 
6, ^ are the co-ordinates of p, and r', fl', 9' are the co-ordinates 
of p' , there is a relation between G and G' which can be inferred 
from r, 6, <p and r', O', ?>'. These facts give the grounds for 
regarding space as objective, though, even on the basis of 
these facts, the space which is objective will not be identical 
with the space of perception, but only correlated with it. 

The events which cause a i^otograph obviously take place 



336 PHYSICAL AND PERCEPTUAL SPACE-TIME 


at the surface of the photographic plate ; what happens between 
this and the object photographed consists of causal antecedents, 
not of the inunediate cause. And the resulting photograph is 
in the plate, not in the object. Similarly the events which 
are the immediate causal antecedents of our percept are in 
the eye and optic nerve, and the percept is in us, not in the 
outer world, when we are speaking of physical space. The 
whole of our perceptual world is, for physics, in our heads, 
since otherwise there would be a spatio-temporal jump between 
stimulus and percept which would be quite unintelligible. 
Any two events which we experience together — «.g. a noise 
and a colour which we perceive to be simultaneous — are 
" compresent.” I should not say, however, that two percepts 
which are not both “ conscious ” must be compresent. Two 
events are compresent when they form together one causal 
unit or part of one — this is a sufficient, but perhaps not a 
necessary, condition. When two percepts are experienced 
together, they are thus causally conjoined ; but when either is 
“ unconscious ” they may not be, and therefore we cannot 
be sure that they are compresent. It is not necessary, con- 
sequently, to suppose that the mind occupies a mere point in 
physical space. 

|It is now necessary to point out the limitations to the 
accuracy of the above account. In the first place, there are 
departures from the laws of perspective which can be easily 
fitted in — opaque bodies, prisms, looking-glasses, echoes, etc. 
These cases are easy because the departure from regularity 
as regards one sense is accompanied by evidence, from another 
sense, of the existence of a physical object at the centre of the 
disturbance, or at the apex if the disturbance is conical, like 
a shadow. Then there are the cases where a physical object 
is inferred from the disturbance, although there is no direct 
evidence of its existence. But none of these are really im- 
portant. The two important matters are; (i) The difficulties 



PHYSICAL AND PERCEPTUAL SPACE-TIME 337 


about measurement ; (2) the difference between a percept as it 
seems and a stimulus as it is inferred. 

(i) The difficulties about measurement have already been 
discussed, but we must now endeavour to reach conclusions 
about them. As already pointed out, every measurement, 
however inaccurate, records a fact, though not always the 
fact which it is intended to record. We saw a moment ago 
that, if we measure the co-ordinates r, 6, 9? of an object to be 
photographed and of a number of cameras, we can make 
inferences as to the pictures which the various cameras will 
make of the object. We inferred that the co-ordinates repre- 
sented relations to our body which have certain peculiar 
properties of the sort called geometrical, in the sense that when 
we know the co-ordinates of two bodies relatively to ourselves, 
we can infer their co-ordinates relatively to each other. All 
this is only roughly true if our measurements are careless: in 
that case, when we mean to discover intrinsic relations, we 
are only discovering very complicated relations involving our 
sense-organs and perhaps even our desires. We seek a 
technique for eliminating all circumstances except those with 
which we wish to be concerned, and to a great extent we are 
successful. But relativity informs tis that there is a residue 
of variability in measures which cannot be eliminated, because, 
in fact, the relations we try to measure are partially non- 
existent. Or, more correctly, they are relations involving 
more terms than we thought they did. We supposed that 
co-ordinates represented relations to the axes. But if we had 
two sets of axes momentarily coinciding, while one was moving 
relatively to the other, the co-ordinates of €in event would not 
in general be the same with respect to both. And we cannot 
even, in any strict sense, discover any exact relation between 
distant points such as could give physical significance to co- 
ordinates. The appearance to the contrary is only an approxi- 
mate truth, which cannot be made precise. 



338 PHYSICAL AND PERCEPTUAL SPACE-TIME 


All this represents a failure of correspondence between 
physical space-time and perpetual space and time. If we 
assume that the human body moves in a geodesic, perceptual 
time may be identified with the integral of ds taken along that 
geodesic, while perceptual space consists of certain relations 
between simultaneous percepts (the word " simultaneous ” 
raises no difficulties, since all percepts are in our heads), partly 
themselves perceptual, partly inferred, but all just what they 
are, whatever physics may say. There are certain respects 
in which we can modify perceptual space to suit physics, and 
certain others in which we cannot. We can, for example, 
infer that percepts consist of imperceptible parts, if physics 
gives us ground for thinking so. But where we perceive some 
relation between percepts, we cannot deny that there is such 
a relation, however little physics may allow it to subsist 
between the objects said to be perceived. The rule is: We 
can infer extra complexity of structure in percepts if physics 
requires it, but, however much physics may require it, we 
cannot infer a smaller complexity than is demanded by the 
study of percepts on their own account. In the world of 
percepts, the distinction between space and time does really 
exist, and space does really have certain properties which 
relativity denies to physical space. Thus to this extent the 
correspondence between perceptual and physical space breaks 
down, and measurement, which has to do primarily with 
percepts, fails to give us quite such good data as we hoped to 
obtain for inferences as to the physical world. 

(2) I come now to the difference between a percept as it 
seems and a stimulus as it is inferred. But this is not the 
whole scope of the problem to be discussed. The word " per- 
ception ” implies relation to a physical object ; we are supposed 
to “ perceive ” a chair or a table or a person. If physics is 
correct, the relation of a percept to a physical object is very 
remote and curious. In ordinary cases, we see objects by 



PHYSICAL AND PERCEPTUAL SPACE-TIME 339 


means of light which is reflected or scattered, which increases 
the complication. To take the simplest possible case, let ns 
suppose that we are seeing a glowing gas. The percept seems 
to be a patch of bright colour of a certain shape, sensibly 
continuous in perceptual space, and approximately constant 
in perceptual time. Perception gives knowledge only in so 
far as this percept corresponds to what is really taking place 
in the gas. Now if physics is true, there are great differences 
between the apparent structure of the percept and the real 
structure of what is taking place in the gas. (Differences 
other than structural may be ignored.) Instead of something 
steady and continuous, such as the percept seems to be, the 
process in the gas is supposed to.be a large number of separated 
sudden discrete upheavals. It is true that there are important 
similarities between the percept and the physical event. The 
shape of the percept corresponds to the shape of the region in 
which the upheavals are taking place, with the limitations 
mentioned just now in connection with measurement. The 
colour of the percept corresponds to the amount of energy lost 
by each atom in an upheaval. The constancy of the percept 
corresponds to the statistical constancy in the rate at which 
upheavals occur in any not too small portion of the gas. Thus 
everything in the percept represents a statistical fact about 
the gas, with the exception of the colour, which is supposed 
to represent a fact about each atom. This, by the way, is an 
odd reversal of Locke’s dictum about secondary qualities; the 
colour is the most nearly objective of all the elements in the 
percept. 

These differences are all of one kind in a certain respect: 
they attribute more structure to the physical occurrence than 
to the percept. This is in line with the general principle that 
the relation of distant to near appearances is one-many, so 
that differences in the percept imply differences in the object, 
but not vice versa. The finer structure of the object is all, in 



34® PHYSICAL AND PERCEPTUAL SPACE-TIME 

the last analysis, inferred from the grosser structure of percepts, 
but it involves the comparison of many percepts and the 
search for invariable causal laws, in the manner which we 
considered in Part II. There is therefore no inconsistency 
in the view that the physical event differs from the percept in 
the way suggested by physics, since the difference consists 
in attributing more structure to the physical event, not in 
denying to it those elements of structure which are possessed 
by the percept. 

It is possible, if we choose, to attribute to the percept the 
same structure as that possessed by the physical occurrence, 
or rather the same structure as that possessed by the immediate 
external stimulus. It cannot be proved that this hypothesis 
is untrue, but it is less useful than it might be supposed to be, 
because only what is known about percepts is epistemologi- 
cally important, and such structure, if it exists, is certainly 
imperceived. What we only discover about percepts by means 
of inference does not belong to the part which affords pre- 
misses for science, but is, from the standpoint of theory of 
knowledge, in the same position as events in the external 
world. Therefore, although percepts may have an imperceived 
structure, this does not diminish the significance of the fact 
that the structure we perceive in percepts has only a one-many 
relation to that of their stimuli. 

The question must be faced; Is physical space-time perhaps 
much more unlike the space and time of perception than we 
have supposed ? Have we been victims of imaginative lazi- 
ness in our merely piecemeal modifications of common-sense 
prejudices ? Dr Whitehead, most emphatically, is not open 
to such a charge; his "fallacy of simple location,” when 
avoided, leads to a world-structure quite different from that 
of common sense and early science. But his structure depends 
upon a logic which I am unable to accept, namely the logic 
which supposes that " aspects ” may be not quite alike, and 



PHYSICAL AND PERCEPTUAL SPACE-TIME 341 


yet may be in some sense numerically one. To my mind, such 
a view, if taken seriously, is incompatible with science, and 
involves a mystic pantheism. But I shall not pursue this 
topic here, having treated it on former occasions. The 
question I wish to ask is: Without adopting heroic measures, 
what could we suppose about physical space-time, if we were 
anxious to preserve what is probably true in physics, but not 
anxious to keep as near as possible to common sense ? In 
particular, can space-time itself be atomic, as the existence of 
the unit of action h seems to suggest ? And first, how are we 
to conceive " action ”? 

Action is usually defined as the time-integral of energy ; since 
energy can be identified with mass, “action” may also be 
defined as mass multiplied by time. Gravitational mass is a 
length; e.g. the mass of the sun is 1-47 kilometres.* Since 
gravitational and inertial mass are equal, we might regard 
action as length multiplied by time. Dr Jeans {Atomicity and 
Quanta, p. 8) says; 

“ There can hardly be an atomicity of the continuum itself, 
for, if there were, a rmiversal constant of the physical dimen- 
sions of space multiplied by time ought to pervade the whole 
of physical science. Nothing of the kind is even suspected, nor, 
so far as I know, has ever been so much as surmised. Thus 
science can to-day proclaim with high confidence that both 
space and time are continuous.” 

In this passage, the “high confidence ” seems to me to go 
beyond what is warranted. If there were a scientific gain in 
conceiving the space-time structure atomically, I do not 
believe that any theoretical arguments to the contrary could 
interpose a veto. Arguments from dimensions, such as 
Dr Jeans employs, have no longer the definiteness that they 
had before the introduction of relativity. As we have just 
seen, we could define " action ” so that its dimensions would be 
• Eddington, op. cU., p. 87. 



342 PHYSICAL AND PERCEPTUAL SPACE-TIME 

length multiplied by time. Now there is a imiversal constant 
of action, namely A. Perhaps, if we were to take action as 
one of the basic conceptions of physics, we might be able to 
construct a physics which would be atomistic all through, and 
yet would contain all that is verifiable. I do not " proclaim 
with high confidence" that this is possible; I only invite 
attention to the hypothesis, as worth investigating on the 
chance of its affording a simphfication of the conceptual 
apparatus of physics. In the following chapters, this hypo- 
thesis is to be borne in mind. 



CHAPTER XXXIII 

PERIODICITY AND QUALITATIVE SERIES 

The periodic character of many physical occurrences has been 
obvious ever since men observed their own respiration and the 
alternation of night and day, but it has acquired a quite new 
importance with the discovery of the quantum. The quantum 
characterizes a whole period of a rapid periodic process, not 
any one moment of the period; it thus requires us to consider 
the period as a whole, and in some sense reverses what has 
hitherto been the trend of physical laws, namely to proceed 
away from integrals towards differentials. It will be re- 
membered that the quantum principle, as enunciated by 
Wilson and Soramerfetd, states: Given a periodic or quasi- 
periodic process, the kinetic energy of which has been expressed 
by means of “ separated ” co-ordinates, if is any one of 
these co-ordinates and is the kinetic energy, then 


where the integration is to extend over one complete period 
of q^, and % is a small integer which is the quantum number 
associated with q^. This law is essentially concerned with a 
whole period, and thus makes periodicity fundamental in 
physics in quite a new way. 

Before going further, it wiU be well to consider how far 
periodicity retains this importance in the newer quantum 
mechanics inaugurated by Heisenberg. For this purpose, 
we may concentrate attention upon the one fundamental 
equation involving A in the new system. This equation takes 
the form:* j. 

* M. Born and P. Jordan, 

Physik, 34, p. 871. Also M. 1 
ib., 35. P- 562. 



344 PERIODICITY AND QUALITATIVE SERIES 


where p and q are matrices, q being a Hamiltonian co-ordinate 
in the new sense, and p the corresponding “ impulse,” also in 
the new sense; while i is the unit matrix. This equation is 
asserted to hold for aU motions, not only for such as are periodic. 
But in the case of motions which are not periodic, it gives a 
result which approximates to that of classical mechanics. 
Thus it remains the case that the new mechanics is only 
necessitated by periodic motions, although it is technically 
possible to find a quantum principle which is also applicable 
to non-periodic motions. Hence the importance of periodicity 
remains intact from an empirical point of view, though some- 
what diminished from the point of view of a statement of 
fundamental laws. In any case, it remains sufficiently 
important to demand a separate discussion. 

Traditionally, periodicity in physics was a question of 
motion: a body described the same path in space over and 
over again. With the coming of relativity, it has become 
necessary to modify this account somewhat. In space-time, 
every point has a date, and cannot be occupied twice; neither 
the earth nor an electron can describe again the orbit it 
described on a former occasion. And periodicity will be 
relative to a given system of co-ordinates: if, in one system, 
a co-ordinate runs through a given range of values repeatedly, 
and always in equal times, it may happen that, in another 
system, even if there is an oscillating co-ordinate, its periods 
are not aU equal. A change of axes may even take away all 
trace of periodic character from a process. Since, however, 
the quantum principle compels us to treat periodicity as 
physically important, it would seem that we must regard it 
as a character belonging to a process when referred to axes 
which move with it, since this would overcome the difficulties 
connected with relativity. If, in certain cases, this method 
is not open to us, some other must be found which equally 
avoids these difficulties. But where processes connected with 



PERIODICITY AND QUALITATIVE SERIES 345 

matter (as opposed to electromagnetic processes) are concerned 
we shall, I think, find no other possibility except to take axes 
which move with the matter concerned. But this makes it 
impossible to treat periodicity as fundamentally a character 
exhibited in a motion, since we have reduced to rest the body 
in which the periodic process is taking place. The suggestion 
I have to make is that, fundamentally, periodicity is con- 
stituted by the recurrence of qualities. 

In the present chapter, I wish to consider what can be 
meant by the " quality ” of an event ; I wish also to investigate 
the connection of quahty with causality and motion and 
periodicity. 

Physics traditionally ignores quality, and reduces the physical 
world to matter in motion. This view is no longer adequate. 
Energy turns out to be more important than matter, and light 
possesses many properties — e.g. gravitation — which were 
formerly regarded as characteristic of matter. The sub- 
stitution of space-time for space and time has made it natural 
to regard events, rather than persistent substances, as the 
raw material of physics. Quantum phenomena have thrown 
doubt on continuity of motion. For these and other reasons, 
the old simplicities have disappeared. 

When we start from perception instead of from mathe- 
matical physics, we find that the events with which we are 
best acquainted have “ qualities,” by means of which they 
can be arranged in classes and series. All colours have some- 
thing in common which is not possessed by soimds. Two 
colours may be so similar as to be almost or quite indistin- 
guishable, but they may also be very dissimilar. As Gestali- 
psychologie has emphasized, shapes are perceived quahtatively, 
not analytically as a system of interrelated parts. But this 
whole conception of quality, which plays such a large part in 
our perceptual life, has been wholly absent from traditional 
physics. Colours, sounds, temperatures, etc., have all been 



346 PERIODICITY AND QUALITATIVE SERIES 


regarded as caused by various kinds of motions. There was 
no objection to this so far as it succeeded, but, if and where 
it proves insufficient, there can also be no objection to re- 
introducing qualitative differences into the physical world. 

There is, however, one essential limitation. We may find 
reasons for supposing qualitative differences, in order to be able 
to build up the kind of structure which we have inferred; but 
we cannot have any means of knowing what are the qualities 
which differ. This point was discussed in Part II., and need 
not now detain us. 

The apparatus so far assumed, apart from qualities, has 
been : co-punctuality, cause-and-effect, and the quantum 
laws. I say " cause-and-effect ” because it is necessauy to be 
able to distinguish the earlier from the later event in a trans- 
action, and this is a smaller assumption than that of a general 
time-order among events in one causal series. The above 
apparatus sufficed except for one purpose: that of defining 
" repetition.” The possibility of repetition is at the bottom 
of the common-sense distinction between space and time ; the 
substitution of space-time should, one might suppose, make 
repetition impossible, and yet the whole of what is distinctive 
in quantum physics, and the theories of light and sound, not 
to mention other matters, depend upon periodicity, which 
involves repetition. So long as we had billiard-balls moving 
in an unchanging space, we could be content with repetition 
of configuration. But now spatial distance, which is essential 
to configuration, has to be anal}^d into an elaborate indirect 
relation depending upon the existence of common causal 
ancestors or descendants. We must, therefore, be able to 
distinguish among events by means additional to their space- 
time relations. 

There is, however, a considerable difficulty in finding laws 
govemii^ what we are calling “ qualities.” In a world of 
continuous processes, one would say that qualities must 



PERIODICITY AND QUALITATIVE SERIES 347 

change gradually. But in a quantum process they apparently 
change suddenly. Perhaps, however, this suddenness does 
not exist in a steady rhythmic process ; or perhaps, even if it 
does, it may involve small changes producing a serial character 
in the successive qualities. Take, for example, the revolution 
of an electron about a nucleus. In the newer quantum theory 
this does not really occur, but we may consider how it could 
be interpreted if it were necessary to assume it. Let us make 
a fantastic hypothesis, purely for illustrative purposes ; let us 
suppose that the electron and the nucleus can see each other, 
and that neither rotates on its own axis. Then they will get 
pictures of each other whidi change during each revolution, 
and repeat the cycle of changes each time. Now let us turn 
this hypothesis round, and begin by assuming the recurrent 
series of pictures. From this we can infer the revolution of 
the electron, provided we are free to construct space as we like, 
subject to certain formal laws. Now in fact we have this 
freedom; the “ space ” in which the electron revolves need 
only have certain abstract mathematical properties, and, so 
long as it has them, it may be constructed out of any material 
available. So long as the electron continues in one orbit, we 
may conceive, at any rate as a schematic simplification, that 
there is a persistent event E which may be taken as repre- 
sentative of it, and in like manner that there is a persistent 
event P representative of the proton. Now let us suppose that, 
compresent with E but not with each other, there are successive 
events p^, />,, p^, . . . which'may be regarded as " aspects ” 
of the proton, and are related to each other more or less in the 
way in which the appearances of the proton from different 
places would be related if the electron could see. Similarly 
let us assume a series of events «i, c,, c,, . . . compresent with 
P but not with each other, analogous to what would be 
appearances of the electron to the proton if the proton could 
see. And let us further suppose that, after a certain set 



348 PERIODICITY AND QUALITATIVE SERIES 

of such events, an exactly similar set recurs, or a very approxi- 
mately similar set. This supposition provides us with the 
material required for a periodic relative motion. We shall 
say, therefore, not that perspectives differ because spatial 
relations change, but that change in spatial relations consists 
of systematic alteration in perspectives. Such a view is 
feasible, but it makes similarity and difference of quality 
essential. It ceases to be fantastic if we drop the analogy 
with vision except as regards purely formal characteristics. 

Let us now set forth the analysis of a periodic process 
suggested by the above, bringing it into relation with the 
construction of points in Chapter XXVIII. Let us assume, 
to begin with, that the process is discrete; this hypothesis can 
be dropped later, but simplifies the initial statement . Suppose, 
for the sake of illustration, that there are ten qualities, q^, qi, 
Jj, . . . q^, and that there exist events 

<*10. <*lli «lji • • • <*i». <ho> ¦ • ‘*29’ ®jo> • • 

which are subject to the following conditions: 

(i) a,„, a„, . . . have the quality q^,; a,i, a,i . . . 

have the quality qi, etc. 

(z) Each of the a’s is compresent with its immediate neigh- 
bour to left and right, but with none of the other a’s ; 

(3) If m<n, any point of space-time of which a,^ but not 
a„ is a member has a time-like interval from any point of 
which but not a,, is a member. 

In that case, the series of a’s constitutes a periodic process, 
having ten a’s in each period. The last digit in the suffix 
of an a indicates the quality of the a — i.e. if the last digit is r, 
the quality is q , — ^while the remaining digits indicate the 
number of the period. 

If all the a’s are events in the history of one piece of matter, 
that piece of matter is undergoing the periodic process. If 
there is a correlative series of b’s in another piece of matter, 



PERIODICITY AND QUALITATIVE SERIES 349 


the two periodic processes together make up one relative 
motion of a periodic character, such as the revolution of an 
electron about a proton. 

Generalizing the above, while still assuming that the process 
is discrete, suppose we have r qualities q-i, q^, . . . q^, and a 
set of events 


flu. ai2. • • • "if. " 21 . a22. • • • «2r. «81. • • • 

where, as before, the last suffix indicates the quality, i.e. 
has the quality Suppose, also, that each a is 

compresent with p of its predecessors and p of its successors, 
where 2p+i<r; but that no a is compresent with any a except 
these. The remaining assumptions are to be as before. Then 
again we obtain a rhythm which may be regarded as an analysis 
of periodic processes in physics. 

If we suppose that the a’s are not compresent with any 
events except the other specified a’s, then the group of a’s 
with which a given a is compresent constitutes a point, which 
may be taken as the middle point in the duration of the a in 
question. We can take this point as representative of the a in 
question, since their relation is one-one. Thus the a in question 
is associated with a point, in spite of the fact that it lasts for a 
finite time, i.e. is compresent with events not compresent with 
each other. 

It is to be observed that, according to the theory of space-time 
in Chapters XXVIII. and XXIX., it is quite possible for some 
parts of space-time to be continuous and others discrete. 
I am supposing, at the moment, that we are considering a 
periodic process in a discrete part of space-time; this does not 
involve the hypothesis that all space-time is discrete. 

If the a’s in one periodic process, as we supposed a moment 
ago, are not compresent with any events except certain 
neighbom-ing a’s (which must be fewer than the whole of one 
period), then the number of points in a period is the same as 



350 PERIODICITY AND QUALITATIVE SERIES 


the number of a’s, and either affords a measure of the duration 
of the period, measured by its proper time. It is obvious that, 
in a discrete part of space-time, the natural measure of distance 
Mrill be number of intermediate points. We see also how the 
proper time of one process can differ from that of another. 
Let us suppose that our a’s form an “ isolated ” process (i.e. 
are not compresent with anything except other a’s), except 
at the beginning and end; the first and last a’s are to be 
compresent with the first and last terms of another periodic 
process composed of b’s, which also is to be isolated except 
at its ends. Then the proper time of the 6-process is measured 
by the number of b’s between the two ends, which need not 
have any relation to the number of a’s. This illustrates, what 
of course follows from relativity, that periodicity must be 
measured by standards intrinsic to the process concerned, not 
by standards appropriate to other periodic processes. Such 
remarks would hardly be necessary but for the fact that 
relativity and quantum theory at present stand apart from 
each other, and have not yet been brought into one whole 
by the physicists. 

The above can be stated in the language of mathematical 
logic, thereby making the character of the assumptions clearer 
and the generalization to continuous processes easier. Let Q be 
the series of quahties, A the series of events in the rhythmic 
process. Let us imagine the events arranged in rows and 
columns, so that each row consists of one period and each 
column consists of all the events having a given quality. We 
assume a one-many relation S, whose domain is the field of Q 
and whose converse domain is the field of A . When q has the 
relation S to a, we say " a has the quality q” If a is any 
term in the field of ^4 , let j be the term which has the relation 
S to a ; then the next term below a in the same column [i.e. the 
corresponding a in the next period) is the first term a' in the 
A series which is after a and to which q has the relation S. 



PERIODICITY AND QUALITATIVE SERIES 351 

The " ro\v of a ” consists of all a’s earlier than a' and not earher 
than a. The “ column of a ” consists of all a’s to which q has 
the relation 5 . We assume that S with its converse domain 
limited to one row is one-one, so that each row (» .e. each period) 
is a series which is similar (in the technical sense) to the 
series Q. 

92 9r 

—^Q 

^1 is 


There is no difficulty in adapting the above analysis of 
periodicity to continuous processes. Instead of an enumerated 
set of qualities 91, . . . , we shall have to take some con- 

tinuous series of qualities, such as the colours of the rainbow, 
or the notes produced on a violin by running one’s finger up 
and down the string. The number of events compresent with 
a given event must now be infinite, but must still be less than 
the whole of one period (ignoring events outside the process 
concerned). The number of points in one period, or in any 
finite portion of it, is now infinite, and cannot therefore be 
used as a measure of distance. Thus in regard to metrical 
properties there are important differences between continuous 
and discrete processes. However, I shall not enlarge upon 
these, as I propose to consider the analysis of “ interval ” 
in a later chapter. 

Hitherto I have been considering processes which may be 
regarded as taking place in matter, or which, at any rate, do 
not move with the velocity of light. But light, also, is 
commonly regarded as consisting of a periodic process. Accept- 
ing the wave-theory of light, let us proceed to analyze its 
periodic character. We shall find that it differs in important 
respects from that of periodic processes in matter. 



352 PERIODICITY AND QUALITATIVE SERIES 


The periodic character of a light-wave cannot exist from 
its own point of view, but only from that of the matter which 
it encounters or from which it radiates. We may suppose 
that when light radiates from an atom at the time of a quantum 
change, there is, from the point of view of the atom, a temporal 
series of what we may call " liuninous events,” and that this 
series is periodic in the sense which we have been considering. 
One period of such luminous events constitutes the emission 
of one light-wave. If we suppose that the light is absorbed 
by another atom, we may suppose that each of the luminous 
events is compresent with certain events in the absorbing 
atom, as well as with certain events in the emitting atom. 
As measured by the proper times of the atoms, the time-order 
of the luminous events is the same for the two aloms. But 
from the point of view of the luminous events themselves, 
there is no periodicity. So long as the light does not encovmter 
matter, it consists of separated events which at most " touch *’ 
one other event at each boundary; the traveller who accom- 
panies one of the events can have no cognizance of any of the 
other events, since they cannot catch each other up. If we 
could imagine a homunculus floating on the crest of a light- 
wave, he would have no means of discovering that anything 
periodic was occurring, since he could not “see” the other 
parts of the wave. The different parts of a light -wave cannot, 
in a word, interact causally in any way, because no causal 
action can travel faster than light. 

We cannot even properly speak of a periodicity in the light- 
wave for an observer who watches it pass. We can only see 
light by stopping it. This applies to such phenomena as 
interference, which is only made visible by allowing light to 
meet matter. It is true that interference gives us a ground 
for inferring structure : two processes can neutralize each other, 
but two “things” cannot. If A owes B a pound, and B 
owes A a like sum, the result is zero; but if A has a poirnd in 



PERIODICITY AND QUALITATIVE SERIES 353 


his hand to give to B, and B has a pound in his hand to give 
to A, there are two pounds. Wherever the sum of two occur- 
rences can be null, both occurrences must have a relational 
character. Thus we are justified, by such facts as interference 
patterns, in supposing that, when light falls on a body, the 
body experiences a series of events whose effects upon it are 
of opposite kinds, as if some pushed it one way and some 
another. But all this is from the point of view of the body, 
not of the light. Thus the frequency of light is a characteristic 
which exists for a body which emits light, and for a body 
which absorbs it {e.g. the body of a scientific observer), but 
not for the light itself while it is in vacuo. 

When light is emitted and absorbed, we may therefore 
suppose that what happens is according to the following scheme. 
We have a temporal series of events in the emitting body, 
and, compresent with each of these, a luminous event. These 
luminous events, arranged in the time-order of the compresent 
events in the emitting body, form a periodic process in the 
previous sense. Each of the luminous events is also compre- 
sent with some event in the absorbing body. The time-order 
of the events in the absorbing body is the same as that of the 
events in the emitting body; i.e. if e, e' are events in the emit- 
ting body, compresent respectively with /, V , two Imninous 
events; and if I, I' are respectively compresent with a, a', 
two events in the absorbing body, then if e is earlier than e', 
a is earlier than a'. What happens to light-waves which are 
emitted but not re-absorbed we ceinnot tell, since, by the nature 
of the case, there can never conceivably be any evidence on 
the point. 

According to the above, the frequency of a light-wave is a 
characteristic which it has in relation to matter, not in relation 
to itself. In this it differs from, e.g., the periodicity in the 
revolution of an electron, which may be supposed to exist 
for the electron itself. 


23 



334 PERIODICITY AND QUALITATIVE SERIES 


The chief point of the above hypothesis is the suggestion 
that single "luminous events” extend from the emitting to 
the absorbing body. I do not advance it as anything more 
than a possible hypothesis. One of its main purposes is to 
account for the fact that the interval between two parts of a 
light-ray is zero; but this part of the argument belongs to a 
later chapter. 



CHAPTER XXXW 
TYPES OF PHYSICAL OCCURRENCES 
In this chapter, I propose to advocate a division of physical 
occurrences into three t3^s, which I shall call respectively 
steady events, rhythms, and transactions. The phrase 
" steady events ” is formed on the analogy of “ steady 
motions,” though the events concerned are not supposed to 
be motions. Rhythms are periodic processes, such as we 
considered in the preceding chapter. Transactions are 
quantum changes, in which energy passes from one system 
to another. The laws governing different types of occurrences 
are different, and it is necessary to separate them before 
embarking upon a general discussion of physical causality. 

The traditional view, that physics is concerned exclusively 
with matter in motion, caimot be maintained, for a number of 
reasons. In the first place, the aether, even if it can be said 
to exist, can hardly be regarded as having a granular structtire, 
and events in it, such as, the passage of light, cannot be explained 
as movements of particles of aether. In the second place, 
quantum changes, if they really are sudden, violate the con- 
tinuity of motion, and thus destroy its advantages as an 
imaginative picture. In the third place — and this is philo- 
sophicadly the most important point— -the conception of motion 
depends upon that of persistent material substances, which 
we have seen reason to regard as merely an approximate 
empirical generalization. Before we can say that one piece of 
matter has moved, we must decide that two events at different 
times belong to one ” biography,” and a ” biography ” is 
defined by certain causal laws, not by persistence of substance. 
Consequently motion is something constructed in accordance 
355 



356 TYPES OF PHYSICAL OCCURRENCES 

with the laws of physics, or — we might say — as a convenience 
in stating them; it cannot be one of the fundamental concepts 
of physics. Lastly, there is an argimient which is difficult 
to state precisely, but whidr nevertheless has some weight. 
For Newton, motion was absolute, and a body in motion 
might be regarded as in a different state from a body at rest. 
But when motion was recognized as merely relative, laws of 
motion became laws as to relations to more or less distant 
bodies. They thus came to involve something like action at 
a distance — though this was disguised by the use of differential 
equations not always interpreted according to rigid Weier- 
strassian methods. If we are to avoid action at a distance, 
our fundamental laws must be concerned with terms having 
finite spatio-temporal extension, and thus capable of contact 
and overlapping — in a word, with events rather than particles 
or impenetrable material units. This involves a re-interpre- 
tation of motion as it occurs in physics, which will be con- 
sidered in a later chapter. For the present, I am concerned 
with the materials which will be required for this purpose as 
well as for the interpretation of other physical phenomena. 

A “ steady event,” as I use the term, is anything which 
is devoid of physical structure and is compresent with events 
which are not compresent with each other, but are one eau-lier 
and the other later; in other words, the steady event is a 
member of at least two points which have a time-like interval. 
When a steady event is contrasted with a rhythm, it is assumed 
that the steady event is not part of a periodic process; but it 
cannot be taken as certain that there are any elementary 
events which are not parts of such processes. It may be that 
all non-periodic changes occur by way of transactions; but 
this must be an open question in the present state of know- 
ledge. 

A " rhythm," as already explained, is a recurring cycle of 
events, in which there is a qualitative similarity between 



TYPES OF PHYSICAL OCCURRENCES 357 

corresponding members of different periods. A rh5^thm may 
have a period consisting of a finite number of events, or one con- 
sisting of an infinite number; it may be discrete or continuous. 
If it is discrete, the proper time of one period is measmed by 
the number of events in the period, and the “frequency” 
of the process is the reciprocal of this number. But here we 
are speaking of the frequency as measured by the time proper 
to the period; by an extraneous time the frequency may be 
quite different. What is commonly called the frequency of 
a light-wave is its frequency with respect to axes fixed relatively 
to the emitting body. Its frequency relative to axes which 
travel with it is zero ; this is only the extreme of the Doppler 
effect. There is perhaps a certain inconsistency in the 
practice of studying bodies by means of axes which move 
with them, while light is always treated with reference to 
material axes. If we want to understand light in itself, not 
in its relation to matter, we ought to let our axes travel with it. 
In that case, its periodicity is spatial, not temporal; it is like 
that of corrugated iron. From the standpoint of the light 
itself, each part of a light-wave is a steady event in the sense 
defined above. 

One of the most fundamental of rhythmic processes will be 
the revolution of an electron about a nucleus, unless we accept 
the view of the new quantum mechanics, according to which 
there is no reason to suppose that this really occurs. In the 
Bohr-Sommerfeld theory, this revolution goes on by itself until 
it is altered either by a quantum change or by some more 
conventional chemical or electrical action. The question 
arises: why should we suppose that there is a process at aU ? 
Why not suppose that there is a steady event, possessed of a 
certain amount of energy, which is replaced, in a quantum 
change, by another steady event, possessed of a different 
amount of energy, the balance being radiated or absorbed? 
There is a certain attraction about this hypothesis, since the 



358 TYPES OF PHYSICAL OCCURRENCES 

atom gives no external indication of its presence while the 
supposed process continues, and therefore there can be no 
direct evidence that changes are occurring, such as a steady 
motion supposes. In any case, if an electron is revolving 
round a proton in a circle, and both are spherically symmetrical, 
it is not easy to see, from a relativist point of view, exactly 
what is meant by saying that the electron is revolving. This 
difl&culty is not diminished by the hypothesis of spinning 
electrons. We have the same dififtculties as in the case of 
absolute rotation and Foucault’s pendulum — the difficulties, 
namely, which Newton advanced to prove the necessity of 
absolute motion. Within the system consisting of the electron 
and proton alone, nothing is changing while the electron 
revolves in its circular orbit; the change is only with reference 
to other bodies. Why not regard the state of affairs as static, 
but possessed of a certain amount of energy ? Energy may 
be altered in amount by a change of axes, and is not an invariant 
property of the system; but reference to the outside world 
here is less serious, since the only purpose served by the energy 
of the atom is to provide physics with something which can 
be radiated into the outer world or absorbed from it. That 
is to say, energy is required only as something whose changes 
govern the causal relations of the atom with the outer world. 
This point of view is essentially that of the Heisenberg theory. 

There are several appcirent difficulties in such a view. In 
the first place, the formula for energy obtained on the assump- 
tion that the electron revolves gives exactly the changes of 
energy required to account for spectroscopic phenomena; 
the Bohr-Sommerfeld theory agrees with observation so 
minutely that its formula for energy must be accepted. Of 
course we could say that the energy just happens to be what 
it would be if the electron revolved in one of the quantum 
orbits; but this would seem an almost miraculous coincidence. 
This, however, is not the strongest argument, which is that 



TYPES OF PHYSICAL OCCURRENCES 359 

derived from the quantum principle. The quantum principle 
in its older form can only be applied to periodic processes; 
if it is to apply, as we find that it does, to the interchange of 
energy between light and the atom, we must assrane, if we 
adhere to the older theory, that within the atom there is 
something that can be called a “ frequency,” i.e. something 
w^ich is periodic, which compels us to admit that, within an 
atom in a steady state, there is a recurring process whose 
formal properties are those which would be exhibited by a 
revolution of the electron, and perhaps also by a rotation. 

If we adhere to the Bohr theory, what can be supposed to 
be really occurring ? If relative motion were all that was 
taking place, we should have either to find an interpretation 
for the spinning electron, or else to say that, taking axes 
fixed relatively to any large body, the line joining the electron 
to the proton rotates rapidly; any large body will do, since 
none rotates with an angular velocity comparable to that of 
the electron. But why should the electron be interested in 
this fact ? Why should its capacity for emitting light be 
connected with it ? There must be something happening 
where the electron is, if the process is to be intelligible. This 
brings us back to Maxwell’s equations, as governing what is 
occurring in the medium. And there must be a rhythmic 
character in the events occurring where the electron is, if we 
are to avoid all the troubles of action at a distance. 

We suppose, therefore, that throughout an electromagnetic 
field there are events whose formal properties we know more 
or less, and that they, not the change of spatial configmration, 
are the immediate causes of what takes place. This brings 
us back to the cycle of events which we used in the preceding 
chapter to define a rhythm. The point is that a rhythm can 
never consist merely in periodic changes of spatial relation 
between two or more bodies, but must consist of qualitative 
cycles of events. We have experience of such cycles when 



36o types of physical OCCURRENCES 

we watch a large-scale periodic event, such as the swing of a 
pendulum. All that happens to us during the cycle happens 
in us, not in a number of different places; and any effect upon 
us depends upon what happens to us. I am suggesting that 
this is a proper analogy when we wish to understand how a 
periodic motion affects an electron. 

I come now to what I shall call " transactions,” by which 
I mean quantum changes. I call them " transactions ” 
because energy is exchanged between different processes. 
The processes concerned must be periodic, since otherwise 
the quantum principle is imnecessary. In the simplest case, 
that of emission of light by a hydrogen atom, we have as 
antecedent, speaking the language of the older quantum 
theory, one periodic process (the revolution of the electron 
in an orbit other than the minimum orbit) and as consequent 
two processes, namely: (i) The revolution of the electron in 
a smaller orbit, (2) a light-wave. The latter, as already 
explained, is only periodic in a certain sense. The energy of 
the antecedent is the sum of the energies of the consequents. 
The amoimt of action during one period of the antecedent is 
a multiple of h, and so are the amounts of action of the con- 
sequents during one period of each. Exactly the converse 
occiirs when light is absorbed by a hydrogen atom. In other 
cases, both the antecedent and the consequent may consist of 
two or more rhythms; but always there will be conservation 
of energy, and each rhythm will contain an amount of action 
which is a multiple of h. 

As yet, everything concerned with quanta is more or less 
mysterious, although Heisenberg’s theory has somewhat 
diminished the mystery. We do not know whether quantum 
changes are really sudden or not; we do not know whether 
the space concerned in atomic structure is continuous or 
discrete. If electrons always moved in circles, as in the first 
form of Bohr’s theory, we could be content with a granular 



TYPES OF PHYSICAL OCCURRENCES 361 

discrete space, and suppose that the intermediate orbits are 
geometrically non-existent. But the existence of elliptic 
orbits in Sommerfeld’s development of the theory makes this 
difficult. And in atoms with many planetary electrons, the 
paths of some are supposed to cross those of others. In spite 
of these difficulties, however, I do not despair of the hypothesis 
that space-time is discrete. The older quantum theory uses 
the traditional conceptions of physics, and thinks of geometrical 
orbits in a constant space. The Heisenberg theory, on the 
contrary, has a completely new kinematics, according to which 
unquantized orbits (if we may still speak of orbits) are geo- 
metrically impossible. It is difficult, as yet, to translate this 
theory out of its technical form. But even according to the 
older theory, one can see that a discrete space-time is possible. 
For when we think of the matter in terms of space-time, we 
realize that the geometry of the neighbourhood of the atom 
may be different at different times. If an electron moves 
in one sort of orbit at one time and in another at another, 
it does not follow that each sort of orbit was geometrically 
possible at the time when the other was being described. 
Perhaps it is not superfluous to explain what is meant by 
saying that an orbit is " geometrically possible ” though not 
physically actual. What is meant is this: there is a series of 
groups of events, each group being a point, and the series 
being one in which all the intervals of points are time-like, 
and in which, if a constant value is assigned to one of the co- 
ordinates, the remaining three give a curve in a three-dimen- 
sional space having the geometrical properties of the orbit 
in question. Whenever we speak of an orbit geometrically, 
we are assuming that we can distinguish one of the co-ordinates 
as " time,” give it a constant value, and consider the relations 
of the remaining three co-ordinates. Nowit is always possible 
that there may be a fallacy in this procedure, since it may be 
that such geometrical relations as we are considering are 



362 TYPES OF PHYSICAL OCCURRENCES 

impossible among " simultaneous ” points. Moreover, in 
the general theory of relativity, it may be impossible to dis- 
tingui^ one co-ordinate as more representative of time than 
the others. 

When, from a traditional point of view, two orbits cross 
each other, this no longer happens from a relativity standpoint. 
We cannot assume, that is to say, that there is a point from 
which two journeys are possible. Two electrons never actually 
collide. When their orbits are said to cross, all that is meant 
is this: In the system of co-ordinates we have adopted, there 
is a point (*, y, z, t) which is part of the history of one electron, 
and a point {x, y, z, t') which is part of the history of the other. 
In another equally legitimate system of co-ordinates, these 
two points would not have three co-ordinates identical. And 
the fact that a certain orbit passes from {x, y, z, t) in a certain 
direction does not imply that there is an orbit passing from 
(*, y, z, i') in a direction which is the same so far as x, y, z are 
concerned. Therefore the apparent difficulties in the way of 
a discrete space are not necessarily insuperable. 

From our point of view, it is a difficulty in the quantum 
principle that it is stated in a form involving energy, which, 
from a relativity standpoint, requires reinterpretation. It is 
also a difficulty that we do not know any laws determining 
when a transaction will take place, and that we do not know 
whether it is really sudden or not. For all these reasons, we 
are compelled to be very tentative in philosophizing. I will, 
however, repeat the outcome of this chapter, such as it is. 

In one sense, the theory of space-time points as groups of 
events requires that all change should be discontinuous. An 
event c is a member of a certain set of space-time points, and 
of no others : the boundaries of the region constituted by this 
set are the boundaries of e, so th§t it comes into existence 
suddenly and ceases to exist suddenly. Nevertheless, we can, 
if necessary, provide for continuity within this scheme. 



TYPES OF PHYSICAL OCCURRENCES 363 

Suppose a continuous series of qualities, like the colours of the 
rainbow; suppose that, in some process, eadi of these is corn- 
present with its neighbours up to a certain distance in either 
direction, but not with more distant members of the series. 
Then the group of qualities existing at a point will change 
continuously, although each separate quahty changes dis- 
continuously. We may suppose this to be the nature of change 
between transactions, and in particular during a rhythm. 
There is no proof that change is ever continuous, but there is 
also no proof that it is not. We will assume, for the moment, 
that change between transactions is continuous in the above 
sense, but that transactions are discontinuous. This assump- 
tion is made only for the sake of brevity of statement ; it is 
not asserted to be true, or even more probable than the opposite 
assumption. 

If we take the above view, there will be three kinds of things 
to consider in physics : transactions, steady events, and rhythms. 
Transactions are dominated by quantum laws. Steady events 
continue, without intemaJ change, from one transaction to the 
next, or throughout a certain portion of a continuous change; 
percepts are steady events, or rather systems of steady events. 
The relation of a steady event to a rhythm I conceive accord- 
ing to a musical analogy : that of a long note on the violin while 
a series of chords occurs repeatedly on the piano. All our life 
is Uved to the accompaniment of a rhythm of breathing and 
heart-beating, which provides us with a physiological clock by 
which we cam roughly estimate times. I imagine, perhaps 
fancifully, something faintly amadogous as an accompainiment 
to every steady event. There aire laws connecting the steady 
event with the rh5rihm ; these are the laws of harmony. There 
are laws regulating transactions; these are the laws of counter- 
point. 

We must assume periodicity ais a featiue of the state of 
affairs where there are steady events, since we cannot state 



364 TYPES OF PHYSICAL OCCURRENCES 

the quantum principle without it. We have to find a meaning 
for " frequency ’’ in order to connect energy with h. It is not 
altogether easy to see how one frequency is to be compared 
with another. In the case of light, we can estimate the 
distance between the crest of one wave and the crest of the 
next. Knowing the velocity of light, this teUs us how many 
waves pass a given place in a second. But here the periodicity 
exists for the outside observer; for an observer travelling on 
the crest of a given wave, there is no process and no periodicity. 
For an outside observer, there is a process in the motion of 
the light-wave; but our observer on the wave considers him- 
self to be at rest, and presmnably does not see objects flying 
past him. Thus for him the periodicity of a light-wave is 
spatial rather than temporal. One light-wave wiU consist 
of a series Cj,, «ij, . . . ... of steady events, the 

intervals between which are space-like; the next will consist 
of a series e,,, . . . e^, . . ., again having space-like 
intervals from each other and from the previous series; 
tfi, and will have a similarity of quality which neither 
has to or (where m is different from «). Each of 
these events is supposed to continue as long as the light-wave 
continues, i.e. imtil there is a transaction. Given any 
event e which is connected with matter, e may be compresent 
with fill, Cjj, . . . Cj,, . . . «,i, Cj, . . . . . . successively, 

but not with all at once. This is what happens when a light- 
wave passes an observer or any other piece of matter. A 
series of events forming one light-wave are inseparably asso- 
ciated, in the sense that when there is one of them there will 
be others throughout the space covered by the wave. Similarly 
the series of events (if any) involved in the revolution of an 
electron are inseparably associated; but there is this difference, 
that these events form a temporal series from the standpoint 
of the electron, whereas the events constituting a light-wave 
form a spatial series from the point of view of the light-wave. 



TYPES OF PHYSICAL OCCURRENCES 


365 


There are difi&culties in the above which might be resolved 
in various ways, but we do not know which to choose. What, 
for example, shall we say about the transaction which consists 
in the absorption of energy by an atom from a light-wave ? 
The correct view is supposed to be that, in such a case, a 
planetary electron passes suddenly from a smaller to a larger 
orbit. But if we imagine a light-wave to consist of a number 
of events Cn, Ci,. . . . one might expect that at 

least one whole wave would be required to produce one definite 
effect, and that a part of the wave would produce only part 
of the effect, if any. But a whole wave takes a finite time to 
reach the atom. This difficulty exists for any view which 
regards light as consisting of waves and quantmn transitions 
as sudden, but would be obviated if either of these suppositions 
were dropped. We may therefore take it as part of the general 
unsolved problem of the relation between radiant energy and 
energy associated with matter. This problem, though it 
interests the philosopher, belongs to the domain of physics, 
and can only be profitably considered by a physicist. I am 
therefore content to await the discoveries of others. 

As regards quanta, let us examine once more what is implied 
by the fact that there is an important constant h. In the 
first place, h only exists, or at any rate is only important, in 
the case of periodic processes, and it is a characteristic of one 
complete period. In the second place, only integral multiples 
of h occur. In the third place, when a transaction involves the 
loss by one system of a certain multiple of h, another system 
may acquire another multiple of h : what is transferred always 
unaltered in amount is energy. These seem to be the most 
significant facts about h. 

It seems impossible to resist the view that h represents 
something of fundamental importance in the physical world, 
which, in turn, involves the conclusion that periodicity is an 
element in physical laws, and that one period of a periodic 



366 


TYPES OF PHYSICAL OCCURRENCES 


process must be treated as, in some sense, a unit. This 
follows from the fact that processes arrange themselves so as 
to secure that a period shall have an important property. This 
property is simplest in the case of a light-wave : the energy of 
one light-wave multiplied by the time it takes to pass a given 
material point is A. If we take the velocity of light as unity, 
the time a light-wave takes to pass a given point is equal to 
the spatial distance between the beginning and end of the wave ; 
therefore this distance multiplied by the energy is A. This 
form might seem preferable for our purposes, since it does not 
involve reference to an extraneous materiad point. At least, 
it does not obviously involve such reference; but perhaps the 
reference is concealed in the process of estimating spatial 
distance. We have seen that this process must be indirect; 
one part of a light-wave cannot catch up another, so that the 
space-like interval between them can only be estimated by 
means of some process taking place in matter. 

If it should be found that quantum phenomena are not 
physically fimdamental, much of what has been said in this 
chapter will become unnecessary. It should be said, however, 
that relativity should prepare our minds for the oddest 
feature of the quantum theory, neunely the existence of 
causal laws involving whole periods. The causal imit, on 
relativity principles, should be expected to occupy a small 
region of space-time, not only of space ; it should not there- 
fore be instantaneous, as in pre-relativity d)mamics. If we 
combine this with the hypothesis of a discrete space-time, we 
can imagine a theoretical physics which would make the exist- 
ence of the quantum no longer seem surprising. 

I have to confess, reluctantly, that the theory developed in 
the present chapter, inadequate as it is, is the best that 1 know 
how to suggest on the topic of quanta. Perhaps the progress 
of physics will make a better philosophy of the subject possible 
before long. Meanwhile I commend the matter to the con- 
sideration of the reader. 



CHAPTER XXXV 

CAUSALITY AND INTERVAL 

The conception of " interval,” upon which the mathematical 
theory of relativity depends, is very hard to translate, even 
approximately, into non-technical terms. Yet it is dif&cult 
to resist the conviction that it has some connection with 
causality. Perhaps a discontinuous theory of interval might 
diminish the obstacles to such an interpretation. Let us 
try to discover whether this is the case. 

The view which naturally suggests itself as a point of 
departure is something like this: Given two groups of co- 
puncual events, it may happen that at least one member of one 
group has a causal relation to at least one member of the other 
group; in that case, the interval between the two groups is 
time-like. If causality is a matter of discontinuous transitions, 
one might expect that the magnitude of the interval would 
be measured by the number of intermediate transitions. 
Again, it may happen that no member of one group has a 
causal relation to any member of the other, but that both 
contain members having causal relations to a member of a 
third group. In that case, the interval will be space-like, 
and again one might suppose that the number of intermediate 
links would determine the magnitude of the interval. 

This represents what might be hoped, but as it stands it is 
unduly simple, and open to obvious objections. Let us see, 
therefore, whether it is possible to answer the objections, 
or to introduce such modifications as will obviate them. 

First, let us be clear as to what we mean by a causal relation. 
There is a causal relation whenever two events, or two groups 
of events of which one at least is co-punctual, are related 

367 



CAUSALITY AND INTERVAL 


by a law which allows something to be inferred about the one 
from the other. Formerly, one would have supposed that 
everything about the later event could be inferred from a 
sufi&cient number of antecedents; but in view of the explosive 
and apparently spontaneous character of radio-activity and 
quantum changes, we must be content with a more modest 
definition so far as this point is concerned. In another 
respect, however, our definition is less modest than it would 
formerly have been. In classical dynamics, causal laws connect 
accelerations with configurations, so that from the present 
state of a small region we caimot accurately infer anything as 
to what will be happening there after a finite time. Quanta 
have altered this : we can associate the light radiated from an 
atom with its causal origin, until it hits other matter; we can 
associate the state of the atom after the emission of the light 
with its state before, until it undergoes another quantum 
change. In fact, as we saw in the preceding chapter, we can 
analyze the course of nature into a set of steady events and 
rhythms with causal relations governing the " transactions ’ 
in which rh 5 ^hms undergo changes. The above definition 
was framed with these considerations in mind. 

We shall say, then, that all causal relations consist of a 
series of rhythms or steady events separated by “ transac- 
tions.” If such a series connects a rhythm or steady event 
A with a rhythm or steady event B, we shall say that ^4 is a 
“ causal ancestor ” of B, and B is a ” causal descendant ” 
of A. We may assume that, in such a case, the number of 
transactions between A and B is always finite, since one 
supposes that the time between two transactions cannot 
fall below a certain minimum, or at any rate that the number 
of causally connected transactions in a finite time is never 
infinite. Perhaps we may assume that a rhythm must last 
long 'enough to achieve an amount of action A; perhaps, even, 
we could construct a discrete theory of time from which 



CAUSALITY AND INTERVAL 369 

this result would follow. All this, however, is veiy specu- 
lative. 

Now let us consider the stock case of a light-signal sent 
from A to B, and reflected back from B to A. Only two 
transactions are involved, namely the emission and reflection 
of the light; perhaps we ought to add the final transaction, 
namely the re-absorption of the light by A. In any case, 
there need be only two steady events, one in the outward 
beam and one in the returning beam. But the interval 
between the departure and return of the light may have any 
magnitude. This is all the more curious, as the interval 
between the departure of the light from A and its arrival at 
B is zero, and so is the interval between its departure from B 
and its return to A. This suggests that too much effort 
has been made to regard interval as analogous to distance 
in conventional geometry and time in conventional kinematics. 
Suppose we say that, if an event is a causal ancestor of an 
event c,, we take all the possible causal routes from to Cg, 
and choose that which contains the greatest number of events: 
then the " interval ” from to Cg is defined as the number of 
events in this longest route. It is obvious that, if a measurable 
time elapses between the departure of the light from A eind 
its return to A, there must have been a variety of events at 
A meanwhile. When I say “ at ” A, I have a meaning to be 
considered shortly; but for the moment it is enough to say 
that this meaning includes causal inheritance. Thus we have 
a meaning for the view that the interval at A is quite long, 
and also for the view that the interval between the departure 
of the light from A and its arrival at B is zero. This latter 
statement means that it is the very same event that starts 
from A and arrives at B, and moreover that there is no longer 
causal route connecting the two transactions of starting from 
A and arriving at B. This event which starts from A and 
arrives at B I call a " luminous event.” 


24 



370 


CAUSALITY AND INTERVAL 


But we must deal with space-like intervals before we can 
decide whether the above theory of time-like intervals will 
do. It is to be observed that space-like intervals are obtained 
by calculation from time-like intervals. Let us imagine the 
following ideal experiment: An astronomer on the sun sends 
a message to an earthly mirror, and an astronomer on the earth 
sends one to a solar mirror. Each observes the time of 
departure and return of his own message, and the time of 
arrival of the other’s message. Each finds that the other’s 
message is received at a time half-way between the arrival 
and departure of his own message. They compare notes, and 
discover this fact about each other’s observations. They will 
conclude that, according to the reckonings of both, the two 
messages were despatched simultaneously, and that the 
measure of the space-like interval between the despatch of the 
two messages is half the time between the despatch and return 
of either, i.e. about eight minutes. We may re-state the 
general method involved as follows: Let us have two transac- 
tions S and T connected by a number of causal routes, all 
going straight from S to T; and let the longest of these consist 
of n events. Suppose that there is another transaction S' 
such that its later event extends to T, and that there is no 
longer causal route from S' to T, nor any causal route at all 
from 5 to S'. Here S corresponds to the sending of the signal 
from the earth. S' to the sending of the signal from the sun, 
and T to the arrival of the solar signal at the terrestrial 
observatory. The question is: What is to be the interval 
between S' and S ? There cannot be a causal route from S' 
to S, because if there were it could be prolonged to T, and would 
be longer than the single event which extends from S' to T, 
contra hyp. Thus no causal series connects S and S'; there is 
a causal series connecting S and T; and S' is a transaction 
that begins an event which ends in the transaction T. In 
these circumstances, we say that the interval between S and S' 



CAUSALITY AND INTERVAL 371 

is of a different kind from that between 5 and T, but has the 
same numerical measure. The fact that this definition works 
is what appears as the constant velocity of light. 

Difficulties, however, still suggest themselves. What are 
we to do with the bending of light in a gravitational field ? 
And what are we to say about the connected theory, according 
to which the velocity of light in vacuo is not strictly constant ? 
We have been attempting to regard the passage of light from 
one body to another as a single static occurrence, involving no 
change within itself, and therefore having zero for its proper 
time, since time must be measured by changes. If we have 
to suppose that the light from a star alters its direction as it 
passes near the sim, we shall have to think of the journey of 
the light as a process, not as a mere continuing event. I do 
not believe, however, that this would be regarded as the 
correct account of the influence of gravitation on light. Gravi- 
tation consists in the fact that a geodesic is geometrically 
different from what it would be in the absence of a gravita- 
tional field; the course of the light is not “really” bent, but 
is “ really ” the straightest course geometrically possible. 
In any case, this point arises at an advanced stage in the 
theory of relativity, and the considerations involved are so 
numerous that it would almost certainly be possible to find 
an interpretation consistent with our suggestion if no other 
obstacle existed. 

When an interval is space-like, it is always theoretically 
possible to send a light-signal from one of the events concerned 
to a causal descendant of the other; consequently our definition 
of the measure of a space-like interval is always possible. 

To say that the greatest velocity in nature is that of light 
is to say that, when two transitions are the begiiming and end, 
respectively, of one luminous event, there is no transition 
which is a causal descendant of the one and a causal ancestor 
of the other. To say that a causal chain of transitions belongs 



372 CAUSALITY AND INTE&VAL 

to the history of one piece of matter is to say that no two 
members of the chain can be connected by a chain longer than 
the portion of the given chain which lies between the two tran- 
sitions. This is our translation of the law that the history 
of a piece of matter is a geodesic. 

The fact that the interval between two points of one light- 
ray is zero appears, on the above theory, to be just what might 
be expected. For when an event has temporal extension, 
that means that two events which are compresent with 
it have a causal relation to each other; while when an event 
has spatial extension, that means that two events com- 
present with it have a common causal ancestry or posterity. 
Neither happens in the case of a luminous event, which there- 
fore has neither temporal nor spatial extension, in spite of the 
fact that it covers a whole region of space-time points. 

It will be seen that, according to the above, intervals are 
discrete, and are always measured by integers. There is, so 
far as I know, no empirical evidence for or against this view. 
If the integers concerned were very large, the phenomena 
would be sensibly the same as if intervals could vary con- 
tinuously. I do not put forward the theory with any confidence 
in it as it stands, but rather to suggest to men with more 
physical competence the possibility of great chamges in our 
picture of the world without rejecting anything probably 
true. In order to bring out this point, I shall now re-state 
the theory without interposing argumentative justifications. 

The world, it is suggested, consists of a number of events, 
each involving no change within itself, but each connected 
with earlier and later events by quantum or other laws which 
enable us to regard the earlier as the cause and the later as 
the effect. The quantum transition I call a " transaction.” 
A transaction is subject to laws as to the conservation of 
energy and as to action. Events may be compresent, and one 
event may be compresent with a number of others which are 



CAUSALITY AND INTERVAL 


373 


separated by transitions; in that case, the one event is said to 
last for a long time. We can even obtain a continuous time 
in our theory, if the number of events compresent with a given 
event is infinite, and their beginnings and ends do not s3mchro- 
nize, i.e. one of them may be compresent with two others 
which are not compresent with each other. But I see no reason 
to suppose that the number of events compresent with a given 
event is infinite, or to desire a theory which makes time con- 
tinuous; I therefore lay no stress upon this possibility. 

In a transaction, or during a rhythm, the causal antecedent 
may consist of more than one event, and so may the causal 
consequent; but the events which constitute the causal ante- 
cedent must all be co-punctual, and so must those which con- 
stitute the causal consequent. Any event of the antecedent 
group will be called a “ parent ” of any event of the conse- 
quent group. When two events are connected by a chain of 
events, each of which is a parent of the next, the one is said 
to be an “ ancestor ” of the other, and the other a “de- 
scendant ’ ’ of the one. Two events may be connected by many 
causal chains, but all will consist of a finite number of events, 
and we assume that, in the case of any two given events, 
there is a maximum to the number of generations in the 
various lines of descent connecting them. This maximum 
number is the measure of “ interval '' when the interval is 
time-like. When the interval is space-hke, the definition of 
interval is slightly more comphcated. 

To define space-like intervals, we must first say a few words 
about light. When a luminous event travels from one body 
to another, I regard the whole as one static event, involving 
no internal change or process. Consequently, from the stand- 
point of the event itself, if one coidd imagine a being of whose 
biography it formed a part, there is no time between the begin- 
ning and the end. Since nothing travels faster than light, it 
is impossible that two parts of one luminous event should 



374 CAUSALITY AND INTERVAL 

be compresent with two events of which one is a causal 
descendant of another; therefore there is no extraneous source 
from which the luminous event can discover that it is lasting 
a long time, and there is, in fact, no meaning in sa5dng that it 
is lasting a long time. But when we say that it is reflected 
back to its starting-point, we mean that it has undergone a 
transaction which has turned it into a new luminous event, 
and that this new event is compresent with causal descendants 
of events compresent with the earlier one, these compresent 
events being not luminous, but of the kinds associated with 
matter. Now, given any two events S and S', neither of 
which is an ancestor of the other, it is possible to find a 
luminous event compresent with S' and with a descendant T 
of S. We then say that the events S and S’ have a space-like 
separation, whose measure is that of the time-like separation 
between S and T. 

In the above theory, it is assumed that, in all cases where 
one process or piece of matter has an effect upon another, 
there is at least one event which is compresent with both. 
This is the form taken by the denial of action at a distance. 

If we assume, as we have been doing, that change is dis- 
continuous, a single period of a rhythm will contain some finite 
number of points. Suppose, now, that there are two rhythms 
such that the initial event of a period in the one is always 
identical with the initial event of a period in the other, but 
the other events are diverse; and suppose that the first rhythm 
contains m event in a period while the second contains n. 
Tfien a period of the first rhythm will contain tn points, land 
one of the second will contain n. We said that the " interval ” 
between two events was to be the number of points in the 
longest causal route from one to the other; hence the interval 
between the beginning and end of a period in either rhythm is 
measured by the greater of the two numbers m and ». Suppose 
this is n. Thai we may r^ard the m-rhythm as having a 



CAUSALITY AND INTERVAL 


375 


of the two rhythms would be the same. This suggests, in a 
certain class of cases, a possibility of defining " velocity ” 
otherwise than by relative motion. How far the resulting 
properties of “ velocity ” would resemble those resulting 
from the usual definition, I do not know. 

Tfiere is no difficulty in defining what is to be meant by 
saying that a steady event " moves.” An event E occupies 
a number of points of space-time, which can be regarded as a 
four-dimensional tube divisible into sections such that all 
the points in one section are simultaneous, and are all later or 
aU earlier than all the points in another section. We shall 
then regard our event E as moving along the tube, and occupy- 
ing the various instantaneous sections successively. But this 
does not imply any process or change within £; it merely 
implies treinsitions among events compresent with E but 
not all compresent with each other. It seems, therefore, 
that everything essentied to theoretical physics can be stated 
in terms of our theory. 

According to the above theory, motion is discontinuous. 
But this hypothesis is required for one purpose only, namely 
for the definition of interval. It is easy to introduce such 
axioms as shall make our space-tinie continuous, and secure, 
as in current physics, that discontinuity shall be confined to 
quantum phenomena, i.e. to what we have called “ trans- 
actions.” But if this is done, otrr definition of interval must 
be abandoned, and interval resumes its place as something 
mysterious and unaccountable. There is no logical reason 
why it should not have such a place; the laws of transactions 
have such a place in our account. But it is always intellec- 
tually satisfying when we can reduce the number of inexphca- 
bilities. So far as I can discover, there is no good ground for 
supposing that motion is continuous; it is therefore worth 
while to develop a discontinuous h5q)othesis if we can thereby 
increase the imity and diminish the arbitrariness in our 
account of the physical world. 



CHAPTER XXXVI 
THE GENESIS OF SPACE-TIME 
Space time, as it appears in mathematical physics, is obviously 
an artefact, i.e. a structure in which materials found in the 
world are compounded in such a manner as to be convenient 
for the mathematician. In the present chapter, I wish to 
collect what has already been said on this subject in various 
parts of the book, and to consider the resulting metaphysical 
status of space-time. 

In the general theory of relativity, space-time appears 
in two ways: first, as providing a four-dimensional order; 
secondly, as giving rise to the metrical concept of “ interval.” 
Both are relations between "points,” but both are treated 
mathematically as differential relations. This requires us 
to solve a purely mathematical problem : what is the function 
or process which tends towards these relations as a limit ? 
This is on the assumption that space-time is continuous, 
which we do not know it to be. Let us begin with this hypo- 
thesis, and proceed afterwards to the hypothesis of discrete- 
ness. In the absence of evidence, it is necessary to develop 
both. For the present, therefore, I assume space-time to be 
continuous. This involves, or at least renders natural, the 
assumption that there is an infinite number of events corn- 
present with any given event; I shall make this assumption 
also so long as I assume continuity. 

" Compresence ” is assumed to be a symmetrical relation, 
which every term in its field has to itself, and whose field is 
capable of being well ordered. A group of five events is 
capable of a relation called “ co-punctuahty,” which means, 
in effect, that there is a region common to all five. A group 

376 



THE GENESIS OF SPACE-TIME 377 

of more than five events is called " co-punctual ” when every 
quintet chosen out of it is co-punctual. A “ point ” is defined 
as a co-punctual group of events which cannot be added to 
without ceasing to be co-punctual. " Events ” are defined 
as the field of the relation of compresence. Hence, by means 
of not unplausible axioms, we arrive at the space-time order 
presupposed in the assignment of co-ordinates. This part of 
the theory is straightforward. 

When we come to " interval ” there is more difficulty. In 
the discussion of measurement we decided, following Eddington, 
that equality of two intervals is what has to be defined, and 
that this has to be defined as a hmit when both intervals tend 
towards zero. For this purpose, we supposed a relation of 
five points a, b, c, d, d', which we may express in the words : 
" abed' is more nearly a parallelogram than abed.” From 
this, by means of a certain apparatus of axioms, we can arrive 
at what seems to be metrically necessary for mathematical 
physics. But this procedure is somewhat artificial. It seems 
natural to suppose that our relation of five points arises as 
follows : between any two points there is a relation, which for 
the moment we will call "separation,” and the separation 
of a and b is more like that of c and d' them like that of e and d. 
Thus we shall have to do with degrees of resemblance between 
separations of point-pairs ; these separations, however, cannot 
exist only for infinitesimal distances, but must exist for finite 
distances, at any rate if they are sufficiently small. 

We have therefore to ask ourselves whether any physical 
meaning can be foimd for " sep2iration,” remembering that 
in the limit it is to have the properties of a smsdl interval ds. 
This means to say that a separation may be of two sorts, 
space-like and time-like; also that the separation between 
two parts of a light-ray is zero. Now the separation will be 
time-like if there is any event at the one point which is a causal 
ancestor of an event at the other point ; and the separation will 



378 


THE GENESIS OF SPACE-TIME 


be space-like if some event at the one point but not at the 
other and some event at the other but not at the one have 
a common ancestor or descendant, but no event at either is 
an ancestor or descendant of, or identical with, any event at the 
other. We shall assume that every pair of points has some 
causal relation, direct or indirect; that is to say, given any two 
events, e^ and e^, there will be somewhere in space-time two 
compresent events of which one is an ancestor or descendant 
of and the other of e,. This is hardly more than a definition 
of the "world of physics”; for if an event had no causal 
relation, however indirect, to the part of the world which 
we know, it could never be inferred by us, and would in effect 
belong to a different universe. It follows that if two diverse 
points have neither a time-Uke nor a space-like separation, 
there is an event which is a member of both, but nothing at 
either is an effect of anything at the other. This happens with 
parts of a light-ray, if we suppose, as we have done, that it 
consists of steady events which persist until the light-ray is 
transformed into some other form of energy. 

Thus we are led to the view that the relation of separation 
is somehow connected with the amoimt of causal action inter- 
vening between the two points concerned. It is easy to give 
a precise meaning to this idea when we assume a discrete 
space-time, but it is much more difficult in a continuous 
space-time. Nevertheless, it is perhaps not impossible. 

Causality, for these purposes, may be confined to rhythms 
and transactions; mere relative motion, whether accelerated 
or uniform, will be regarded as not involving causality in the 
sense in which we mean it. Indirectly causality will be in- 
volved, since there will be a change of space-like separation ; 
but the causality will be primarily concerned with other events, 
not with those constituting the biographies of the bodies in 
relative motion. In saying this, we are, I think, only inter- 
jo’eting the Einsteinian theory of gravitation. 



THE GENESIS OF SPACE-TIME 379 

In the preceding chapter, when we were considering a discrete 
space-time, we defined a time-like interval as the number of 
intervening points on the longest causal route connecting the 
two given points. The natural way to generalize this so as to 
become apphcable to a continuous space-time would be to re- 
gard the number of points as the measure of geodesic distance ; 
this would enable us to say that the geodesic distance traversed 
by a unit of matter measures the amount of causal action which, 
it has imdergone. If we further assume that, in comparing 
different units of matter, we must multiply by the mass to 
obtain a measure of the amount of causal action, then the 
amount in a finite motion is the integral of mds. But this 
is the amount of " action ” in the technical sense.* 

It seems therefore — though this is only a tentative suggestion 
— that we can regard a time-hke separation as the measure 
of the maximum amount of causal action on the various causal 
routes which lead from one point to another. It is to be 
observed that, since points are classes of events, motion from 
one point to another consists in the cessation of certain events 
and the coming into existence of others; every such change is 
causal when it happens along the route of a piece of matter, 
since the unity of a piece of matter at different times is defined 
by means of the concept of a causal route. There is, therefore, 
so far as 1 can see, no fundamental objection to regarding 
time-like separations as measuring amounts of intervening 
causal action, and small time-hke intervals as limits of separa- 
tions. Space-hke intervals, as we have seen, are derivative 
from time-hke intervals ; hence they, also, depend upon amount 
of causal action. 

Passing now to the hypothesis of a discrete space-time, in 
which each point consists of a finite number of events, we find 
that a similar analysis to the above is still possible, and is 
in fact considerably easier than when we assume continuity. 

• Eddington, op. dt., p. 137. 



380 


THE GENESIS OF SPACE-TIME 


In a discrete space-time, if P and P' are two points containing 
events which belong to the biography of one material tmit, 
the number of points on the route of this unit between P and 
P' is always finite. If several geodesic routes lead from P to 
P', there MdU be a maximum to the number of points on such 
routes; this maximum will be the measure of the interval 
between P and P', which will therefore always be an integer. 
A longer route means a greater number of intermediate events, 
and therefore a greater amount of causal action. Thus again 
the interval measures the greatest amount of causal action on 
any causal route from P to P'. And causal routes consist of a 
succession of rhythms or steady events separated by transactions. 

It will be observed that, in our theory, spatial distance does 
not directly represent any physical fact, but is a rather com- 
plicated way of speaking about the possibihty of a common 
causal ancestry or posterity. For example, while a light-wave 
is supposed to be travelling away from an atom, it has no 
physical relation to anything in the atom subsequent to its 
emission. It may be reflected back to the atom after reaching 
some other atom, and then half the time of the double journey 
(as measured at the first atom) is called the spatial distance 
between the two atoms (taking the velocity of light as unity). 
But there is no adequate ground for asserting that at every 
moment of the intervening time the light-ray is at a certain 
spatial distance from the atom; indeed, the theory of relativity 
vetoes such a suggestion. There is therefore, so far as I can 
see, no reason in physics for beheving in continuous motion, 
except as a convenient s}mibohc device for dealing with the 
time-relations of various discontinuous changes. And whether 
we regard space-time as continuous or discontinuous, motion 
loses its fundamental character, being replaced by successions 
of events belonging to the bi(^aphies of bits of matter. This 
is inevitable if we are tohcfld that motion is relative and action 
at a distance is a fiction. 



THE GENESIS OF SPACE-TIME 


381 


There remains a question which is of some interest. Can 
time be derived from causality, or must we retain temporal 
order as fundamental, and distinguish cause and effect as the 
earlier and later terms in a causal relation ?* This question 
is boimd up with that as to the reversibility of physical 
processes. If causal relations are S5mimetrical, so that when- 
ever A and B are related as cause and effect it is physically 
possible that, on another occasion, B and A may be so related, 
then we must regard the time-order as something additional 
to the causal relation, not derivative from it. If, on the other 
hand, causal laws are irreversible, then we can define the time- 
order in terms of them, and need not introduce it as a logically 
separate factor. The question of reversibility is still sub 
judice, and I will not venture an opinion. The second law of 
thermodynamics asserts an irreversible process, but is purely 
statistical. All radiation of energy in spherical waves is 
prima facie irreversible, but we do not know that it really 
takes place. Dr Jeans suggests that there may also be con- 
verging spherical waves, emd that these can be used to explain 
quantum phenomena.! For him, reversibility is a funda- 
mental postulate.! I do not know whether he would maintain 
that the ejection of an electron or helium nucleus from a radio- 
active atom is a reversible process; but it must be confessed 
that, if it is not, the existence of radio-active elements becomes 
a mystery. Quantum theory has, on the whole, increased the 
arguments in favour of reversibility; but it cannot be said that 
there is as yet conclusive evidence on either side. We must, 
therefore, leave open the question whether the time-order of 
events in one causal route can be defined in terms of causal 
laws. 

• This question (as well as various others) is ably discussed in a 
valuable article by Hans Reichenbach, Kausalsiruhtur der Welt und 
der Untersckied von Vergangenheit und Zukunft, Sitzui^berichte 
der Baierischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, mathematisch-natur- 
wissenscbaftUche Abteilung, J925, pp. 133-175. 

t Op. at., pp. 52-3. 


t Ih.. p. 33. 



CHAPTER XXXVII 
PHYSICS AND NEUTRAL MONISM 
In this chapter, I wish to define the outcome of our analysis 
in regard to the old controversy between materialism and 
idealism, and to make it clear wherein our theory differs from 
both. So long as the views set forth in previous chapters are 
supposed to be either materialistic or idealistic, they will seem 
to involve inconsistencies, since some seem to tend in the 
one direction, some in the other. For example, when I say 
that my percepts are in my head, I shall be thought material- 
istic ; when I say that my head consists of my percepts and 
other similar events, I shall be thought idealistic. Yet the 
former statement is a logical consequence of the latter. 

Both materialism and idealism have been guilty, uncon- 
sciously and in spite of explicit disavowals, of a confusion in 
their imaginative picture of matter. They have thought of 
the matter in the external world as being represented by their 
percepts when they see and touch, whereas these percepts are 
really part of the matter of the percipient’s brain. By exam- 
ining our percepts it is possible — so I have contended — to 
infer certain formal mathematical properties of external matter, 
though the inference is not demonstrative or certain. But 
by examining our percepts we obtain knowledge which is not 
purely formal as to the matter of our brains. This knowledge, 
it is true, is fragmentary, but so far as it goes it has merits 
surpassing those of the knowledge given by physics. 

The usual view would be that by psychology we acquire 
knowledge of our " minds,” but that the only way to acquire 
knowledge of our brains is to have them examined by a 
physiologist, usually after we are dead, which seems somewhat 



PHYSICS AND NEUTRAL MONISM 383 

unsatisfactory. I should say that what the physiologist sees 
when he looks at a brain is part of his own brain, not part 
of the brain he is examining. The feeling of paradox about 
this view comes, I should say, from wrong views of space. 
It is true that what we see is not located where our percept 
of our own brain would be located if we could see our own 
brain; but this is a question of perceptual space, not of the 
space of physics. The space of physics is connected with 
causation in a manner which compels us to hold that our 
percepts are in our brains, if we accept the causal theory of 
perception, as I think we are bound to do. To say that two 
events have no spatio-temporal separation is to say that they 
are compresent ; to say that they have a small separation is 
to say that they are connected by causal chains all of which 
are short. The percept must therefore be nearer to the sense- 
organ than to the physical object, nearer to the nerve than to 
the sense-organ, and nearer to the cerebral end of the nerve 
than to the other end. This is inevitable, unless we are going 
to say that the percept is not in space-time at all. It is usual 
to hold that " mental ” events are in time but not in space; 
let us ask ourselves whether there is any ground for this 
view as regards percepts. 

The question whether percepts are located in physical 
space is the same as the question of their causal connection 
with physical events. If they can be effects and causes of 
ph5rsical events, we are bound to give them a position in 
physical space-time in so far as interval is concerned, since 
interval was defined in causal terms. But the real question 
is as to “ compresence ” in the sense of Chapter XXVIII. 
Can a mental event be compresent with a physical event ? 
If yes, then a mental event has a position in the space-time 
order; if no, then it has no such position. This, therefore, is 
the crucial question. 

When I maintain that a percept and a physical event can 



384 PHYSICS AND NEUTRAL MONISM 

be compresent, I am not maintaining that a percept can have 
to a piece of matter the sort of relation which another piece 
of matter would have. The relation of compresence is between 
a percept and a physical event, and physical events are not 
to be confounded with pieces of matter. A piece of matter 
is a logical structure composed of events; the causal laws of 
the events concerned, and the abstract logical properties of 
their spatio-temporal relations, are more or less known, but 
their intrinsic character is not known. Percepts fit into the 
same causal scheme as physical events, and are not known 
to have any intrinsic character which physical events cannot 
have, since we do not know of any intrinsic character which 
could be incompatible with the logical properties that physics 
assigns to physical events. There is therefore no ground for 
the view that percepts cannot be physical events, or for sup- 
posing that they are never compresent with other physical 
events. 

The fact that mental events admittedly have temporal 
relations has much force, now that time and space are so much 
less distinct than they were. It has become difficult to hold 
that mental events, though in time, are not in space. The 
fact that their relations to each other can be viewed as only 
temporal is a fact which they share with any set of events 
forming the biography of one piece of matter. Relatively 
to axes moving with the percipient's brain, the interval be- 
tween two percepts of his which are not compresent should 
always be temporal, if his percepts are in his head. But the 
interval between simultaneous percepts of different per- 
cipients is of a different kind; and their whole causal environ- 
ment is such as to make us call this interval space-like. I 
conclude, then, that there is no good ground for excluding 
percepts from the physical world, but several strong reasons 
for including them. The difficulties that have been supposed 
to stand in the way seem to me to be entirely due to wrong 



PHYSICS AND NEUTRAL MONISM 385 

views as to the physical world, and more particularly as to 
jdiysical space. The wrong views as to ph 3 rsical space have 
been encouraged by the notion that the primary qualities are 
objective, which has been held imaginatively by many men 
who would have emphatically repudiated it so far as their 
explicit thought was concerned. 

I hold, therefore, that two simultaneous percepts of one 
percipient have the relation of compresence out of which spatio- 
temporal order arises. It is almost irresistible to go a step 
further, and say that any two simultaneous perceived contents 
of a mind are oompresent, so that all our conscious mental 
states are in our heads. I see as little reason against this 
extension as against the view that percepts can be compresent. 
A percept differs from another mental state, I should say, 
only in the nature of its causal relation to an external stimulus. 
Some relation of this kind no doubt always exists, but with 
other mental states the relation may be more indirect, or 
may be only to some state of the body, more particularly the 
brain. " Unconscious ” mental states will be events com- 
present with certain other mental states, but not having 
those effects which constitute what is called awareness of 
a mental state. However, I have no wish to go further into 
psychology than is necessary, and 1 will pursue this topic no 
longer, but return to matters of more concern to physics. 

The point which concerns the philosophy of matter is that 
the events out of which we have been constructing the physical 
world are very different from matter as traditionally con- 
ceived. Matter was expected to be impenetrable and inde- 
structible. The matter that we construct is impenetrable as 
a result of definition : the matter in a place is all the events that 
are there, and consequently no other event or piece of matter 
can be there. This is a tautology, not a physical fact; one 
might as well argue that London is impenetrable because 
nobody can hve in it except one of its inhabitants. Inde- 

*5 



PHYSICS AND NEUTRAL MONISM 


structibility, on the other hand, is an empirical jn-operty, 
believed to be approximately but not exactly possessed by 
matter. I mean by indestructibility, not conservation of mass, 
which is known to be only approximate, but conservation of 
electrons and protons. At present it is not known whether 
an electron and a proton sometimes enter into a suicide pact 
or not,* but there is certainly no known reason why electrons 
and protons should be indestructible. 

Electrons and protons, however, are not the stufi of the 
physical world: they are elaborate logical structures composed 
of events, and ultimately of particulars, in the sense of 
Chapter XXVTI. As to what the events are that compose 
the physical world, they are, in the first place, percepts, and 
then whatever can be inferred from percepts by the methods 
considered in Part II. But <m various inferential grounds 
we are led to the view that a percept in which we cannot 
perceive a structure nevertheless often has a structure, i.e. 
that the apparently simple is often complex. We cannot 
therefore treat the minimum visible as a particular, for both 
physical and psychological facts may lead us to attribute 
a structure to it— not merely a structure in general, but such 
and such a structure. 

Events are neither impenetrable nor indestructible. Space- 
time is constructed by means of co-pimctuality, which is the 
same thing as spatio-temporal interpenetration. Perhaps 
it is not unnecessary to explain that spatio-temporal inter- 
penetration is quite a different thing from logical inteipene- 
tration, though it may be suspected that smne philosophers 
have been led to favour the latter as a result of the arguments 
for the former. We are accustomed to imagining that numerical 
diversity involves spatio-temporal separation; hence we tend 
to think that, if two diverse entities are in one place, they 

* It is thought highly probable that they do. See Dr Jeans, " Recent 
Developmeats of Cosmlcal Physics,’’ Nature, December 4, 1926. 



PHYSICS AND NEUTRAL MONISM 


387 


cannot be wholly diverse, but must be also in some sense one. 
It is this combination that is supposed to constitute logical 
interpenetration. For my part, I do not think that logical 
interpenetration can be defined without obvious self-contra- 
diction; Bergson, who advocates it, does not define it. The 
only author I know of who has dealt seriously with its diffi- 
culties is Bradley, in whom, quite consistently, it led to a 
thorough-going monism, combined with the avowal that, in 
the end, all truth is seU-contradictory. I should m 3 rself regard 
this latter result as a refutation of the logic from which it 
follows. Therefore, while I respect Bradley more than any 
other advocate of interpenetration, he seems to me, in virtue 
of his ability, to have done more than any other philosopher 
to disprove the kind of system which he advocated. However 
that may be, the spatio-temporal interpenetration which is 
used in constructing space-time order is quite different from 
logical interpenetration. Philosophers have been slaves of 
space and time in the imaginative application of their logic. 
This is partly due to Euler's diagrams and the notion that the 
traditional A, E, 1,0 were elementary forms of propositions 
and the confounding of “ * is a ^ " with “ all o’s are /J’s.” 
All this led to a confusion between classes and individuals, 
and to the inference that individuals can interpenetrate because 
classes can overlap. I do not suggest exphcit confusions of 
this sort, but only that traditional elementary logic, taught in 
youth, is an almost fatal barrier to clear thinking in later 
years, miless much time is spent in acquiring a new technique. 

On the question of the material out of which the physical 
world is constructed, the views advocated in this volume have, 
perhaps, more affinity with idealism than with materialism. 
What are called “ mental ” events, if we have been right, are 
part of the material of the ph 3 ^cal world, and what is in onr 
heads is the mind (with additions) rather than what the 
physiologist sees through his microscope. It is true that we 



388 


PHYSICS AND NEUTRAL MONISM 


have not suggested that all reality is mental. The positive 
arguments in favour of sudi a view, whether Berkele}^ or 
German, appear to me fallacious. The sceptical argument of 
the phenomenalists, that, whatever else there may be, we 
caimot know it, is much more worthy of respect. There are, 
in fact, if we have been right, three grades of certainty. The 
highest grade belongs to my own percepts; the second grade 
to the percepts of other people; the third to events which are 
not percepts of anybody. It is to be observed, however, that 
the second grade belongs only to the percepts of those who 
can communicate with me, directly or indirectly, and of those 
vdio are known to be closely analogous to people who can 
commimicate with me. The percepts of minds, if such there be, 
wl^ich are not related to mine by communication — e.g. minds 
in other planets — can have, at best, only the third grade of 
certainty, that, namely, which belongs to the apparently 
lifeless physical world. 

The events which are not perceived by any person who 
can communicate with me, supposing they have been rightly 
inferred, have a causal connection with percepts, and are 
inferred by means of this connection. Much is known about 
their structure, but nothing about their quality. 

While, on the question of the stuff of the world, the theory 
of the foregoing pages has certain affinities with idealism — 
namely, that mental events are part of that stuff, and that 
the rest of the stuff resembles them more than it resembles 
traditional billiard-balls — the position advocated as regards 
scientific laws has more affinity with materialism than with 
idealian. Inference from one event to another, where possible, 
seems only to acquire exactness when it can be stated in terms 
of the laws of physics. There are psychological laws, physio- 
logical laws, and chemical laws, which cannot at present be 
reduced to physical laws. But none of them is exact and 
without exceptions; they state tendencies and averages rather 



PHYSICS AND NEUTRAL MONISM 


than mathematical laws governing minimum events. Take, 
for example, the psychological laws of memory. We caimot 
say: At 12.55 G.M.T. on such and such a day, A will remember 
the event e — ^unless, indeed, we are in a position to remind him 
of it at that moment. The known laws of memory belong 
to an early stage of science— earlier than Kepler’s laws or 
Boyle’s law. We can say that, if A and B have been experienced 
together, the recurrence of A tends to cause a recollection of B, 
but we cannot say that it is sure to do so, or that it will do so 
in one assignable class of cases and not in another. One 
supposes that, to obtain an exact causal theory of memory, 
it would be necessary to know more about the structure of 
the brain. The ideal to be aimed at would be something like 
the physical explanation of fluorescence, which is a phenomenon 
in many vrays analogous to memory. So far as causal laws 
go, therefore, ph)rsics seems to be supreme among the sciences, 
not only as against other sciences of matter, but also as against 
the sciences that deal with life and mind. 

There is, however, one important hmitation to ^s. We 
need to know in what physical circumstances such-and-such 
a percept will arise, and we must not neglect the more intimate 
qualitative knowledge which we possess concerning mental 
events. There will thus remain a certain sphere which will 
be outside physics. To take a simple instance : physics might, 
ideally, be able to predict that at such a time my eye would 
receive a stimulus of a certain sort ; it might be able to trace 
the physical properties of the resulting events in the eye and 
the brain, one of which is, in fact, a visual percept; but it 
could not itself give os the knowledge that one of them is a 
visual percept. It is obvious that a man who can see knows 
things which a blind man cannot know; but a blind man can 
know the whole of ph3^cs. Thus the knowledge which other 
men have and he has not is not part of ph}rsics. 

Although there is thus a sphere excluded from physics, 



390 PHYSICS AND NEUTRAL MONISM 

yet phjrsics, together with a " dicti<Hiary,” gives, apparently, 
all causal knowledge. One supposes that, given the physical 
characteristics of the events in my head, the " dictionary ’’ 
gives the '* mental ’’ events in my head. This is by no means 
a matter of course. The whole of the foregoing theory of 
physics might be true without entailing this consequence. 
So far as jdiysics can show, it might be possible for different 
groups of events having the same structure to have the same 
part in causal series. That is to say, given the physical causal 
laws, and given enough knowledge of an initial group of events 
to determine the purely ph3^cal properties of their effects, 
it might nevertheless be the case that these effects could be 
qualitatively of different sorts. If that were so, physical 
determinism would not entail psychological determinism, 
siiKe, given two percepts of identical structure but diverse 
quality, we could not tell which would result from a stimulus 
known only as to its physical, ix. structural, properties. 
This is an unavoidable consequence of the abstractness of 
physics. If physics is concerned only with structure, it cannot, 
per se, warrant inferences to any but the structural properties 
of events. Now it may be a fact that (e.g.) the structure of 
visual percepts is very different from that of tactual percepts; 
but I do not think such differences could be established with 
sufficient strictness and generality to enable us to say that such- 
and-sudi a stimulus must produce a visual percept, while 
such another must produce a tactual percept. 

On this matter, we must, I think, appeal to evidence which 
is partly psychological. We do know, as a matter of fact, 
that we can, in normal drcumstances, more or less infer 
the percept from the stimulus. If this were not the case, 
speaking and writing would be useless. When the lessons are 
read, the congregation can follow the words in their own 
Bibles. The differences in their "thoughts" meanwhile 
can be connected causally, at least in part, with differences 



PHYSICS AND NEUTRAL MONISM 


391 


in their past experience, and these are supposed to make 
themselves effective by causing differences in the structure 
of brains. All this seems sufficiently probable to be worth 
taking seriously; but it lies outside ph}^ics, and does not 
follow from the causal autonomy of physics, supposing this 
to be established even for human bodies. It will be observed 
that what we are now considering is the converse of what is 
required for the inference from perception to ph3reics. What 
is wanted there is that, given the percept, we should be able 
to infer, at least partially, the structure of the stimulus — 
or at any rate that this should be possible when a sufficient 
number of percepts are given. What we want now is that, 
given the structure of the stimulus (which is all that physics 
can give), we should be able to infer the quality of the percept 
— ^writh the same limitations as before. Whether this is the 
case or not, is a question lying outside physics; but there is 
reason to think that it is the case. 

The aim of physics, consciously or unconsciously, has 
alwa3rs been to discover what we may call the causal skeleton 
of the world. It is perhaps surprising that there should be 
such a skeleton, but ph3reics seems to prove that there is, 
particularly when taken in omjunction with the evidence 
that percepts are determined by the physical character of 
their stimuli. There is reason — ^though not quite conclusive 
reason — ^for regarding physics as causally dominant, in the 
sense that, given the phjrsical structure of the world, the 
qualities of its events, in so far as we are acquainted with them, 
can be inferred by means of cmrelations. We have thus in 
effect a psycho-cerebral parallelism, althou|^ the interpreta- 
tion to be put upon it is not the usual one. We suppose that, 
given sufficient knowledge, we could infer the qualities the 
events in our heads from their physical properties. This is what 
is really meant when it is said, loosely, that the state of the 
mind can be inferred from the state of the brain. Although 



39* 


PHYSICS AND NEUTRAL MONISM 


I think that this is probably true, I am less anxious to assert 
it than to assert, what seems to me much more certain, that 
its troth does not follow from the causal autonomy of physics 
or from physical determinism as applied to all matter, including 
that of living bodies. This latter result flows from the abstract- 
ness of physics, and belongs to the philosophy of iA3^ics. 
The other proposition, if true, cannot be established by con- 
sidering physics alone, but only by a study of percepts for their 
own sakes, which belongs to psychology. Ph3r8ics studies 
percepts only in their cognitive aspect; their other aspects 
lie outside its purview. 

Even if we reject the view that the quality of events in our 
heads can be inferred from their structure, the view that 
lflt3rsical determinism applies to human bodies brings us very 
near to what is most disliked in materialism. Physics may 
be unable to tell us what we shall hear or see or " think,” but 
it can, on the view advocated in these pages, tell ns what 
we shall say or write, where we shall go, whether we shall 
commit murder or theft, and so on. For all these are bodily 
movements, and thus come within the scope of physical laws. 
We are often asked to concede that the beauties of poetry 
or music cannot result from |flrysical laws. I should concede 
that the beauty does not result from physics, since beauty 
depends in part upon intrinsic quality ; if it were, as some writers 
on aesthetics contend, solely a matter of form, it would come 
within the scope of physics, but I think these writers do not 
realize what an abstract affair form really is. I should concede 
also that the thoughts oi Shakespeare or Bach do not come 
within the scope of physics. But their thoughts are of no 
importance to os: their wdiole social efficacy depended upon 
certain black marks which they made on white paper. Now 
there seems no reason to suppose that physics does not apply 
to the making of these marks, which was a movement of matter 
just as truly as the revolution of the earth in its orbit. In 



PHYSICS AND NEUTRAL MONISM 


393 


any case, it is undeniable that the socially important part of 
their thought had a one-one relation to certain purely physical 
events, namely the occurrence of the black marks on the white 
paper. And no one can doubt that the causes of our emotions 
when we read Shakespeare or hear Bach are purely physical. 
Thus we cannot escape from the universaUty of physical 

This, however, is perhaps not quite the last word on the 
subject. We have seen that, on the basis of physics itself, 
there may be limits to physical determinism. We know 
of no laws as to when a quantum transaction will take place 
or a radio-active atom will break down. We know fairly well 
what will happen if anjrthing happens, and we know statistical 
averages, which suffice to determine macroscopic phenomena. 
But if mind and brain are causally interconnected, very small 
cerebral differences must be correlated with noticeable mental 
differences. Thus we are perhaps forced to descend into the 
region of quantum transactions, and to desert the macroscopic 
level where statistical averages obtain. Perhaps the electron 
jumps when it likes; perhaps the minute phenomena in the 
brain which make all the difference to mental phenomena 
belong to the region where physical laws no longer detennine 
definitely what must happen. This, of course, is merely a 
speculative possibility; but it interposes a veto upon material- 
istic dogmatism. It may be that the progress of physics will 
decide the matter one way or other; for the present, as in so 
many other matters, the philosopher must be content to await 
the progress of science. 



CHAPTER XXXVIII 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 

In the present state of physics, many questions of considerable 
philosophical importance cannot be answered, although they 
are such as science may hope to answer, and largely such as 
were formerly supposed to have been already answered. This 
makes the task of the philosopher more difficult ; it is necessary 
to develop various hypotheses, so as to be prepared for what- 
ever decision science may arrive at. Certain things, it is 
true, may be taken as definitely ascertained; these things, so 
far as they are relevant to philosophy, were considered in 
Part I. It is clear that, in some sense, there are electrons and 
protons, and we cannot well doubt the substantial accuracy of 
their estimated masses and electric charge. That is to say, 
these constants evidently represent something of importance 
in the phjrsical world, though it would be ra^ to say that they 
represent exactly what is at present supposed. In like manner 
there seems to be no reasonable doubt that there is a constant 
h, whose dimensions are those of action or angular momentum, 
and whose magnitude is substantially what it has been 
estimated to be. It would seem clear also that A is a constant 
which is characteristic of periodic processes. Moreover, the 
change from one such process to another, which is what we 
have called a transaction, is governed by principles connected 
with h in addition to the conservation of energy. 

But it would be very rash to maintain that the current 
mathematical formulation of the quantum principle is the best 
possible; indeed, there are reasons for dissatisfaction with it. 
Perhaps the most important of these is that in expressing the 
kinetic energy we have to employ the method of separation of 



SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 


395 


variables, and that we do not know whether separation of 
variables is alwa}^ possible, or whether all ways of separating 
the variables give equivalent results. Apart from these 
rather technical difficulties, there are others that are less 
definite but perhaps not less important. No one has suc- 
ceeded in making the existence of quanta seem at aU " reason- 
able that is to say, it remains isolated and separate from 
other physical ideas. And whereas it involves discontinuity, 
the whole effect of relativity has been to emphasize continuity. 
Moreover, no one has yet succeeded in explaining interference 
and diffraction by means of light-quanta, or in explaining the 
photo-electric effect without them. For these reasons, the 
time has not yet come when the philosopher can deal confidently 
with quantum theory; he can only suggest what would be his 
philosophy if this or that view had prevailed in physics. 

In relativity, we are on surer ground. The advance on 
the physics of the past, where relativity is concerned, is mainly 
logical and philosophical. It is true that facts led to the 
theory, and that the theory in turn led to the discovery of new 
facts. But the facts were small and only just within the limits 
of observation ; and they had not, as facts, the revolutionary 
importance of the facts about quanta. And now that the 
theory is fairly complete, one can see that, theoretically, it 
ought to have been discovered by Galileo, or at any rate as 
soon as the velocity of light became known. It represents 
in its technique a better philosoiffiy than that of Newton; 
indeed, one of its most remarkable features is the adaptation 
of the technique to the philosophy. 

The theory of relativity, to my mind, is most remarkable 
when considered as a logical deductive system. That is the 
reason, or one of the reasons, why I have found occasion to 
allude so constantly to Eddington. He, more than Einstein 
or Weyl, has expounded the theory in the form most apt for 
the purposes of the philosopher. Minkowski had the same 



396 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 

qudity, but he did not live to see the general theory. For 
philosoi^cal pthposes, therefore. I have allowed mjrself to 
be guided almost entirely by Eddington. 

In the general theory of relativity, we start with a four- 
dimensional continuum of points, whose properties, to begin 
with, are purely ordinal. We then assign four co-ordinates 
to each point on any principle such that the ordinal properties 
of the co-ordinates are the same as those of the points. We then 
assume that, if two points are very close together, there is a 
quadratic function of the co-ordinates which has the same value 
however the co-ordinates may be assigned, subject to the above 
ordinal condition. If this function is positive, its square root 
is called the (time-hke) interval; if negative, the square root of 
the function with its sign changed is called the (space-like) 
interval. Omitting niceties, we may say that the remainder 
of the theory turns mainly on geodesics. A geodesic is a route 
between two space-time points such that the integral of the 
interval along this route is stationary. In the important 
routes, it is a maximum. It appears that energy can be 
divided into parcels which move in geodesics; when these 
parcels move with a velocity less than that of light, they are 
regarded as pieces of matter. Weyl, by imposing certain 
limitations on measurement, succeeds in including electro- 
magnetic phenomena in this scheme. Thus we have a com- 
prehensive theory which may be taken to embrace everything 
except quantum phenomena. 

But although there is so much to give pleasure to the 
logician in this scheme — ^more especially the method of tensors 
and Hamiltonian derivatives— yet the philosopher cannot but 
feel dissatisfaction with the apparently arbitrary assumption 
about intervals. This assumption seemed less arbitrary 
than it is. because of its connection, historically, with the 
theorem of Pythagoras and its modifications in non-Euclidean 
geometry. But the theorem was believed formerly because 



SUMMARY AND CONCXUSION 397 

it had been proved; when the proof was found to have no value, 
it was believed because empirical evidence was thouf^t to 
show its approximate truth. This empirical evidence, of 
course, remains, but the theory of relativity has made its value 
much more problematical than it formerly seemed. And it is 
customary to carry out measurements carefully, taking trouble 
to secure bodies that are as nearly rigid as possible, and optical 
instruments that are accurate. If our co-ordinates are to be 
arbitrary, as they are in the general theory of relativity, it is 
doubtful whether we still have a right to expect that they will 
verify anything analogous to the theorem of Pythagoras. 

As against these doubts, it may be said that the general 
theory has justified itself by the correctness of all its verifiable 
consequences. This is true, and I do not wish to minimize 
the force of the argument. But I seem to observe that, in 
obtaining these results, the theory does not make use of the full 
liberty in assignment of co-ordinates which it claims at the 
start. In astronomy, its co-ordinates are still assigned by the 
usual careful methods, and it is not clear that this care is 
useless. From the method of tensors, it seems to follow that 
we can employ any co-ordinates subject to the ordinal condition. 
But the method of tensors, as used, assumes the formula for 
interval; for this reason. Dr Whitehead found it necessary, in 
his Principle of Relativity, to give a theory of tensors indepen- 
dent of the formula for interval. There is thus still legitimate 
room for doubt as to whether the formula for interval is really 
quite independent of the choice of co-ordinates. 

And, apart from this question, there is great difficulty in 
suggesting any non-technical meaning for interval; yet such a 
meaning ought to exist, if interval is as fundamental as it 
appears to be in the theory of relativity. There is difficulty 
also as to what is meant by measurement. And there is the 
feeling that, perhaps, tensor equations represent purely ordinal 
properties of the space-time continuum, and could, by a better 



398 


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 


technique, be set forth without the use of any coordinates 
at all. The necessary technique does not exist at present, 
but it is not impossible that it may be created before long. 

In Part II., we approached a different type of question: 
the question of the evidence the truth of physics, t.«. of 
the relation of phjrsics to perception. For the purposes of this 
inquiry, it is convenient to use “ perception ” somewhat more 
narrowly than it would be used in psychology. Our purpose 
is epistemological, and therefore perception is only relevant 
in so far as it is explicit and the percept is observed : percepts 
which pass unnoticed cannot be made into premisses for physics. 
The use of percepts for inference as to the physical world rests 
upon the causal theory of perception, since the naive realism of 
common sense turns out to be self-contradictory. The serious 
alternatives to the causal theory of perception are not common 
sense, but solipsism and phenomenalism. Solipsism, as an 
epistemcdogically serious theory, must mean the view that from 
the events which I experience there is no valid method of 
inferring the character, or even the existence, of events which 
I do not experience. If inference is taken in the sense of 
strict deductive logic, there is, so far as I can see, no escape 
from the solipsist position. And it should be observed that 
this position cannot admit unconscious events in me, any 
more than events outside me: its basis is epistemological, and 
therefore, for it, the important distinction is between what I 
experience and what I do not experience, not between what 
is mine and what is not mine in some metaphysical or physical 
sense. We cannot escape from the solipsist position without 
Ininging in induction and causality, which are still subject 
to the doubts resulting from Hume’s sceptical criticism. 

Since, however, all science rests upon induction and causality, 
it seems justifiable, at least pragmatically, to assume that, 
when properly employed, they can give at least a probability. 
In the {wesent work, I have made this assumptimi baldly. 



SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 


399 


without attempting to justify it; I have done this because I 
do not believe that a justification could be much briefer than 
Mr Keynes's Treatise on Probability, and also because, while I 
am convinced that a justification is possible, I am not satisfied 
with those put forward by others or with any that 1 have been 
able to invent myself. It seemed best, therefore, to make the 
assumption as stark as possible, without any attempt at artificial 
plausibility. 

Intermediate between solipsism and the ordinary scientific 
view, there is a half-way house called "phenomenalism.” 
This admits events other than those which I experience, but 
holds that all of them are percepts or other mental events. 
Practically, it means, when advocated by scientific men, that 
they will accept the testimony of other observers as to what 
they have actually experienced, but that they will not infer 
thence anything which no observer has experienced. It may 
be said, in justification of this position, that, while it employs 
analogy and induction, it refrains from assuming causality. 
But it may be doubted whether it can really abstain from 
causality. Phenomenalists appear to take testimony for 
granted, i.e. to assume that the words which they see and hear 
express what they themselves would express if they used them. 
But this involves causality, and involves it in the form in 
which the cause is in one person and the efiect in another. 
There does not seem, therefore, to be any substantial justifica- 
tion for this half-way house. 

We therefore assume, though with less than demonstrative 
certainty, that percepts have causes which may be not percepts, 
and, in particular, that when a number of people have similar 
percepts simultaneously, there is what may be called a 
" field ” of causally coimected events, which, it is found, have 
relations that often enable us to arrange them in a spherical 
order about a centre. We thus arrive at a space-time mder 
of events, which is found to be the same vdiichever of many 



SUMMARY AKD CONCLUSION 


possible methods of arriving at it we adopt; in this order, a 
percept is located in the head of the percipient. In drawing 
inferences from percepts to their canses, we assume that the 
stimulus must possess whatever structure is possessed by the 
percept, though it may also have structural properties not 
possessed by the percept. The assumption that the structural 
properties of the percept must exist in the stimulus follows 
from the maxim " same cause, same effect " in the inverted 
form '* different effects, different causes,” from which it follows 
that if, e.g., we see red and green side by side, there is some 
difference between the stimulus to the red percept and the 
stimulus to the green percept. The structural features pos- 
sessed by the stimulus but not by the percept, when they can be 
inferred, are inferred by means of general laws — e.g. when two 
objects look similar to the naked eye but dissimilar under the 
microscope, we assume that there are differences in the stimuli 
to the naked-eye percepts which produce either no differences, 
or no perceptible differences, in the corresponding percepts. 

These principles enable us to infer a great deal as to the 
structure of the ph)rsical world, but not as to its intrinsic 
character. They put percepts in their place as occurrences 
analogous to and connected with other events in the ph)rsical 
worid, and they enable os to regard a dictaphone or a photo- 
graphic plate as having something which, from the standpoint 
of physics, is not very dissimilar from perception. We no 
longer have to contend with what used to seem mysterious 
in the causal theory of perception: a series of light-waves or 
sound-^ves or what not suddenly producing a mental event 
apparently totally different from themselves in character. 
As to intrinsic character, we do not know enough about it in 
the ph]rsical world to haveari^t to say that it is very different 
from that of percepts; udule as to structure we have reason to 
hold that it is similar in the stimulus and the percept. This 
has become possible owing to the facts that ” matter ” can be 



SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 


401 


regarded as a system of events, not as part of the stuff of the 
world, and that space-time, as it occurs in physics, has been 
found to be much more different from perceptual space than 
was formerly imagined. 

This brings us to Part III., in which we endeavour to discover 
a possible structure of the physical world which shall at once 
justify physics and take account of the connection with per- 
ception demanded by the necessity for an empirical basis for 
physics. Here we are concerned first with the construction 
of points as systems of events which overlap, or are " co- 
punctual,” in space-time, and then with the purely ordinal 
properties of space-time. The method employed is very 
general, and can be adapted to a discrete or to a continuous 
order; it is proved that m, events are sufficient to generate a 
continuum of points, given certain laws as to the manner of 
their overlapping. Tlie vdiole of this theory, however, aims 
only at constructing such properties of space-time as belong to 
antilysis situs: everything appertaining to intervals and metrics 
is (Knitted at this stage, since causal considerations are required 
for the theory of intervals. 

The conception of one unit of matter— -say one electron — 
as a " substanoe,” «.«. a single simple entity persisting through 
time, is not one which we are justified in adopting, since we 
have no evidence whatever as to whether it is false or true. 
We define a single material unit as a " causal line,” i.e. as a 
series of events connected with each other by an intrinsic 
differential causal law which determines first-order changes, 
leaving seomd-order changes to be determined by extrinsic 
causal laws. (In this we are for the moment ignoring quantum 
phenomena.) If there are light-quanta, these will more or 
less fulfil this definiti<m of matter, and we shall have returned 
to a corpuscular theory of light ; but this is at present an open 
question. The udiole concepticm of matter is less fundamental 
to physics than it used to be, since energy has more and more 



402 


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 


taken its place. We find that under terrestrial c<Hidition 8 
electrons and protons persist, but there is nothing in theoretical 
phsrsics to lead us to expect this, and physicists are quite 
prepared to find that matter can be annihilated. This view 
is even put f<nward to account for the energy of the stars. 

The question of interval presents great difficulties, when we 
attempt to construct a picture of the world which shall make 
its importance seem not surprising. The same may be said 
of the quantum. I have endeavoured, not, I fear, with much 
success, to suggest hypotheses which would Unk these two 
curious facts into one whole. I suggest that the world consists 
of steady events accompanied by rhythms, like a long note 
on the violin while arpeggios are played on the piano, or of 
rh}rihms alone. Steady events are of various sorts, and many 
sorts have their appropriate rhythmic accompaniments. 
Quantum changes cmisist of "transactions," i.e, of the 
substitution, suddenly, of one rhythm for another. When 
two events have a time-like interval, if ^ce-time is discrete, 
this interval is the greatest number of transitions on any 
causal route leading from the one event to the other. The 
definition of space-like intervals is derived from that of time- 
like intervals. The whole process of nature may, so far as 
present evidence goes, be conceived as discontinuous; even 
the periodic rhythms may ccmsist of a finite number of events 
per period. The periodic rhythms are required in order to give 
an account of the uses of the quantum principle. A percept, 
at any rate when it is visual, will be a steady event, or system 
of steady events, following upon a transaction. Percepts are 
the only part of the physical world that we know otherwise 
than abstractly. As regards the world in general, both ph3rrical 
and mental, ever3dhing that we know of its intrinsic character 
is derived from the mental side, and almost everything that 
we know of its causal laws is derived from the physical side. 
But from th^ standpoint of philosophy the distincti<m between 
physical and mental is superficial and unreal. 
