INTRODUCTION 

THE conceptions of life and the world which we call "philosophical" are a product of two factors: 
one, inherited religious and ethical conceptions; the other, the sort of investigation which may be 
called "scientific," using this word in its broadest sense. Individual philosophers have differed 
widely in regard to the proportions in which these two factors entered into their systems, but it is 
the presence of both, in some degree, that characterizes philosophy. 

"Philosophy" is a word which has been used in many ways, some wider, some narrower. I propose 
to use it in a very wide sense, which I will now try to explain. 

Philosophy, as I shall understand the word, is something intermediate between theology and 
science. Like theology, it consists of speculations on matters as to which definite knowledge has, 
so far, been unascertainable; but like science, it appeals to human reason rather than to authority, 
whether that of tradition or that of revelation. All definite knowledge— so I should contend— 
belongs to science; all dogma as to what surpasses definite knowledge belongs to theology. But 
between theology and science there is a No Man's Land, exposed to attack from both sides; this 
No Man's Land is philosophy. Almost all the questions of most interest to speculative minds are 
such as science cannot answer, and the confident answers of theologians no longer seem so 
convincing as they did in former centuries. Is the world divided into mind and matter, and, if so, 
what is mind and what is matter? Is mind subject to matter, or is it possessed of independent 
powers? Has the universe any unity or purpose? Is it evolving towards some goal? Are there really 
laws of nature, or do we believe in them only because of our innate love of order? Is man what he 
seems to the astronomer, a tiny lump of impure carbon and water impotently crawling on a small 
and unimportant planet? Or is he what he appears to Hamlet? Is he perhaps both at once? Is there 
a way of living that is noble and another that is base, or are all ways of living merely futile? If 
there is a way of living that is noble, in what does it consist, and how shall we achieve it? Must 
the good be eternal in order to deserve to be valued, or is it worth seeking even if the uni 



verse is inexorably moving towards death? Is there such a thing as wisdom, or is what seems such 
merely the ultimate refinement of folly? To such questions no answer can be found in the 
laboratory. Theologies have professed to give answers, all too definite; but their very definiteness 
causes modern minds to view them with suspicion. The studying of these questions, if not the 
answering of them, is the business of philosophy. 

Why, then, you may ask, waste time on such insoluble problems? To this one may answer as a 
historian, or as an individual facing the terror of cosmic loneliness. 

The answer of the historian, in so far as I am capable of giving it, will appear in the course of this 
work. Ever since men became capable of free speculation, their actions, in innumerable important 
respects, have depended upon their theories as to the world and human life, as to what is good and 
what is evil. This is as true in the present day as at any former time. To understand an age or a 
nation, we must understand its philosophy, and to understand its philosophy we must ourselves be 
in some degree philosophers. There is here a reciprocal causation: the circumstances of men's 
lives do much to determine their philosophy, but, conversely, their philosophy does much to 
detennine their circumstances. This interaction throughout the centuries will be the topic of the 
following pages. 

There is also, however, a more personal answer. Science tells us what we can know, but what we 
can know is little, and if we forget how much we cannot know we become insensitive to many 
things of very great importance. Theology, on the other hand, induces a dogmatic belief that we 
have knowledge where in fact we have ignorance, and by doing so generates a kind of impertinent 
insolence towards the universe. Uncertainty, in the presence of vivid hopes and fears, is painful, 
but must be endured if we wish to live without the support of comforting fairy tales. It is not good 
either to forget the questions that philosophy asks, or to persuade ourselves that we have found 
indubitable answers to them. To teach how to live without certainty, and yet without being 
paralyzed by hesitation, is perhaps the chief thing that philosophy, in our age, can still do for those 
who study it. 

Philosophy, as distinct from theology, began in Greece in the sixth century B.C. After running its 
course in antiquity, it was again submerged by theology as Christianity rose and Rome fell. Its 
second 



great period, from the eleventh to the fourteenth centuries, was dominated by the Catholic Church, 
except for a few great rebels, such as the Emperor Frederick II ( 1 195-1250). This period was 
brought to an end by the confusions that culminated in the Reformation. The third period, from 
the seventeenth century to the present day, is dominated, more than either of its predecessors, by 
science; traditional religious beliefs remain important, but are felt to need justification, and are 
modified wherever science seems to make this imperative. Few of the philosophers of this period 
are orthodox from a Catholic standpoint, and the secular State is more important in their 
speculations than the Church. 

Social cohesion and individual liberty, like religion and science, are in a state of conflict or uneasy 
compromise throughout the whole period. In Greece, social cohesion was secured by loyalty to the 
City State; even Aristotle, though in his time Alexander was making the City State obsolete, could 
see no merit in any other kind of polity. The degree to which the individual's liberty was curtailed 
by his duty to the City varied widely. In Sparta he had as little liberty as in modern Germany or 
Russia; in Athens, in spite of occasional persecutions, citizens had, in the best period, a very 
extraordinary freedom from restrictions imposed by the State. Greek thought down to Aristotle is 
dominated by religious and patriotic devotion to the City; its ethical systems are adapted to the 
lives of citizens and have a large political element. When the Greeks became subject, first to the 
Macedonians, and then to the Romans, the conceptions appropriate to their days of independence 
were no longer applicable. This produced, on the one hand, a loss of vigour through the breach 
with tradition, and, on the other hand, a more individual and less social ethic. The Stoics thought 
of the virtuous life as a relation of the soul to God, rather than as a relation of the citizen to the 
State. They thus prepared the way for Christianity, which, like Stoicism, was originally 
unpolitical, since, during its first three centuries, its adherents were devoid of influence on 
government. Social cohesion, during the six and a half centuries from Alexander to Constantine, 
was secured, not by philosophy and not by ancient loyalties, but by force, first that of armies and 
then that of civil administration. Roman annies, Roman roads, Roman law, and Roman officials 
first created and then preserved 



a powerful centralized State. Nothing was attributable to Roman philosophy, since there was 
none. 

During this long period, the Greek ideas inherited from the age of freedom underwent a gradual 
process of transformation. Some of the old ideas, notably those which we should regard as 
specifically religious, gained in relative importance; others, more rationalistic, were discarded 
because they no longer suited the spirit of the age. In this way the later pagans trimmed the 
Greek tradition until it became suitable for incorporation in Christian doctrine. 

Christianity popularized an important opinion, already implicit in the teaching of the Stoics, but 
foreign to the general spirit of antiquity —I mean, the opinion that a man's duty to God is more 
imperative than his duty to the State. This opinion— that "we ought to obey God rather than 
Man," as Socrates and the Apostles said— survived the conversion of Constantine, because the 
early Christian emperors were Arians or inclined to Arianism. When the emperors became 
orthodox, it fell into abeyance. In the Byzantine Empire it remained latent, as also in the 
subsequent Russian Empire, which derived its Christianity from Constantinople. jyBut in the 
West, where the Catholic emperors were almost immediately replaced (except, in parts of Gaul) 
by heretical barbarian conquerors, the superiority of religious to political allegiance survived, 
and to some extent still survives. 

The barbarian invasion put an end, for six centuries, to the civilization of western Europe. It 
lingered in Ireland until the Danes destroyed it in the ninth century; before its extinction there it 
produced one notable figure, Scotus Erigena. In the Eastern Empire, Greek civilization, in a 
desiccated form, survived, as in a museum, till the fall of Constantinople in 1453, but nothing 
of importance to the world came out of Constantinople except an artistic tradition and 
Justinian's Codes of Roman law. 

During the period of darkness, from the end of the fifth century to the middle of the eleventh, 
the western Roman world underwent some very interesting changes. The conflict between duty 
to God and duty to the State, which Christianity had introduced, took the form of a conflict 
between Church and king. The ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the Pope extended over Italy, 
France, and Spain, Great 


* That is why the modem Russian does not think that we ought to obey dialectical 
materialism rather than Stalin. 


Britain and Ireland, Germany, Scandinavia, and Poland. At first, outside Italy and southern France, 
his control over bishops and abbots was very slight, but from the time of Gregory VII (late 
eleventh century) it became real and effective. From that time on, the clergy, throughout western 
Europe, formed a single organization directed from Rome, seeking power intelligently and 
relentlessly, and usually victorious, until after the year 1300, in their conflicts with secular rulers. 
The conflict between Church and State was not only a conflict between clergy and laity; it was 
also a renewal of the conflict between the Mediterranean world and the northern barbarians. The 
unity of the Church echoed the unity of the Roman Empire; its liturgy was Latin, and its dominant 
men were mostly Italian, Spanish, or southern French. Their education, when education revived, 
was classical; their conceptions of law and government would have been more intelligible to 
Marcus Aurelius than they were to contemporary monarc hs. The Church represented at once 
continuity with the past and what was most civilized in the present. 

The secular power, on the contrary, was in the hands of kings and barons of Teutonic descent, 
who endeavoured to preserve what they could of the institutions that they had brought out of the 
forests of Germany. Absolute power was alien to those institutions, and so was what appeared to 
these vigorous conquerors as a dull and spiritless legality. The king had to share his power with 
the feudal aristocracy, but all alike expected to be allowed occasional outbursts of passion in the 
form of war, murder, pillage, or rape. Monarchs might repent, for they were sincerely pious, and, 
after all, repentance was itself a fonn of passion. But the Church could never produce in them the 
quiet regularity of good behaviour which a modem employer demands, and usually obtains, of his 
employees. What was the use of conquering the world if they could not drink and murder and love 
as the spirit moved them? And why should they, with their armies of proud knights, submit to the 
orders of bookish men, vowed to celibacy and destitute of anned force? In spite of ecclesiastical 
disapproval, they preserved the duel and trial by battle, and they developed tournaments and 
courtly love. Occasionally, in a fit of rage, they would even murder eminent churchmen. 


All the armed force was on the side of the kings, and yet the Church was victorious. The Church 
won, partly because it had almost a 



monopoly of education, partly because the kings were perpetually at war with each other, but 
mainly because, with very few exceptions, rulers and people alike profoundly believed that the 
Church possessed the power of the keys. The Church could decide whether a king should spend 
eternity in heaven or in hell; the Church could absolve subjects from the duty of allegiance, and so 
stimulate rebellion. The Church, moreover, represented order in place of anarchy, and 
consequently won the support of the rising mercantile class. In Italy, especially, this last 
consideration was decisive. 

The Teutonic attempt to preserve at least a partial independence of the Church expressed itself not 
only in politics, but also in art, romance, chivalry, and war. It expressed itself very little in the 
intellectual world, because education was almost wholly confined to the clergy. The explicit 
philosophy of the Middle Ages is not an accurate mirror of the times, but only of what was 
thought by one party. Among ecclesiastics, however— especially among the Franciscan friars —a 
certain number, for various reasons, were at variance with the Pope. In Italy, moreover, culture 
spread to the laity some centuries sooner than it did north of the Alps. Frederick II, who tried to 
found a new religion, represents the extreme of anti-papal culture; Thomas Aquinas, who was 
born in the kingdom of Naples where Frederick II was supreme, remains to this day the classic 
exponent of papal philosophy. Dante, some fifty years later, achieved a synthesis, and gave the 
only balanced exposition of the complete medieval world of ideas. 

After Dante, both for political and for intellectual reasons, the medieval philosophical synthesis 
broke down. It had, while it lasted, a quality of tidiness and miniature completeness; whatever the 
system took account of was placed with precision with relation to the other contents of its very 
finite cosmos. But the Great Schism, the conciliar movement, and the Renaissance papacy led up 
to the Reffonnation, which destroyed the unity of Christendom and the scholastic theory of 
government that centered round the Pope. In the Renaissance period new knowledge, both of 
antiquity and of the earth's surface, made men tired of systems, which were felt to be mental 
prisons. The Copemican astronomy assigned to the earth and to man a humbler position than they 
had enjoyed in the Ptolemaic theory. Pleasure in new facts took the place, among intelligent men. 



of pleasure in reasoning, analysing, and systematizing. Although in art the Renaissance is still 
orderly, in thought it prefers a large and fruitful disorder. In this respect, Montaigne is the most 
typical exponent of the age. 

In the theory of politics, as in everything except art, there was a collapse of order. The Middle 
Ages, though turbulent in practice, were dominated in thought by a passion for legality and by a 
very precise theory of political power. All power is ultimately from God; He has delegated power 
to the Pope in sacred things and to the Emperor in secular matters. But Pope and Emperor alike 
lost their importance during the fifteenth century. The Pope became merely one of the Italian 
princes, engaged in the incredibly complicated and unscrupulous game of Italian power politics. 
The new national monarchies in France, Spain, and England had, in their own territories, a power 
with which neither Pope nor Emperor could interfere. The national State, largely owing to 
gunpowder, acquired an influence over men's thoughts and feelings which it had not had before, 
and which progressively destroyed what remained of the Roman belief in the unity of civilization. 

This political disorder found expression in Machiavelli Prince. In the absence of any guiding 
principle, politics becomes a naked struggle for power; The Prince gives shrewd advice as to how 
to play this game successfully. What had happened in the great age of Greece happened again in 
Renaissance Italy: traditional moral restraints disappeared, because they were seen to be 
associated with superstition; the liberation from fetters made individuals energetic and creative, 
producing a rare florescence of genius; but the anarchy and treachery which inevitably resulted 
from the decay of morals made Italians collectively impotent, and they fell, like the Greeks, under 
the domination of nations less civilized than themselves but not so destitute of social cohesion. 

The result, however, was less disastrous than in the case of Greece, because the newly powerful 
nations, with the exception of Spain, showed themselves as capable of great achievement as the 
Italians had been. 

From the sixteenth century onward, the history of European thought is dominated by the 
Refonnation. The Reformation was a complex many-sided movement, and owed its success to a 
variety of 



causes. In the main, it was a revolt of the northern nations against the renewed dominion of Rome. 
Religion was the force that had subdued the North, but religion in Italy had decayed: the papacy 
remained as an institution, and extracted a huge tribute from Gennany and England, but these 
nations, which were still pious, could feel no reverence for the Borgias and Medicis, who 
professed to save souls from purgatory in return for cash which they squandered on luxury and 
immorality. National motives, economic motives, and moral motives all combined to strengthen 
the revolt against Rome. Moreover the Princes soon perceived that, if the Church in their 
territories became merely national, they would be able to dominate it, and would thus become 
much more powerful at home than they had been while sharing dominion with the Pope. For all 
these reasons, Luther's theological innovations were welcomed by rulers and peoples alike 
throughout the greater part of northern Europe. 

The Catholic Church was derived from three sources. Its sacred history was Jewish, its theology 
was Greek, its government and canon law were, at least indirectly, Roman. The Reformation 
rejected the Roman elements, softened the Greek elements, and greatly strengthened the Judaic 
elements. It thus co-operated with the nationalist forces which were undoing the work of social 
cohesion which had been effected first by the Roman Empire and then by the Roman Church. In 
Catholic doctrine, divine revelation did not end with the scriptures, but continued from age to age 
through the medium of the Church, to which, therefore, it was the duty of the individual to submit 
his private opinions. Protestants, on the contrary, rejected the Church as a vehicle of revelation; 
truth was to be sought only in the Bible, which each man could interpret for himself. If men 
differed in their interpretation, there was no divinely appointed authority to decide the dispute. In 
practice, the State claimed the right that had formerly belonged to the Church, but this was a 
usurpation. In Protestant theory, there should be no earthly intennediary between the soul and 
God. 

The effects of this change were momentous. Truth was no longer to be ascertained by consulting 
authority, but by inward meditation. There was a tendency, quickly developed, towards anarchism 
in politics, and, in religion, towards mysticism, which had always fitted with difficulty into the 
framework of Catholic orthodoxy. There 



came to be not one Protestantism, but a multitude of sects; not one philosophy opposed to 
scholasticism, but as many as there were philosophers; not, as in the thirteenth century, one 
Emperor opposed to the Pope, but a large number of heretical kings. The result, in thought as in 
literature, was a continually deepening subjectivism, operating at first as a wholesome liberation 
from spiritual slavery, but advancing steadily towards a personal isolation inimical to social 
sanity. 

Modern philosophy begins with Descartes, whose fundamental certainty is the existence of 
himself and his thoughts, from which the external world is to be inferred. This was only the first 
stage in a development, through Berkeley and Kant, to Fichte, for whom everything is only an 
emanation of the ego. This was insanity, and, from this extreme, philosophy has been attempting, 
ever since, to escape into the world of every-day common sense. 

With subjectivism in philosophy, anarchism in politics goes hand in hand. Already during Luther’s 
lifetime, unwelcome and unacknowledged disciples had developed the doctrine of Anabaptisn, 
which, for a time, dominated the city of MA!4nster. The Anabaptists repudiated all law, since they 
held that the good man will be guided at every moment by the Holy Spirit, who cannot be bound 
by formulas. From this premiss they arrive at communism and sexual promiscuity; they were 
therefore exterminated after a heroic resistance. But their doctrine, in softened forms, spread to 
Holland, England and America; historically, it is the source of Quakerism. A fiercer fonn of 
anarchism, no longer connected with religion, arose in the nineteenth century. In Russia, in Spain, 
and to a lesser degree in Italy, it had considerable success, and to this day it remains a bugbear of 
the American immigration authorities. This modern fonn, though anti-religious, has still much of 
the spirit of early Protestantism; it differs mainly in directing against secular governments the 
hostility that Luther directed against popes. 

Subjectivity, once let loose, could not be confined within limits until it had run its course. In 
morals, the Protestant emphasis on the individual conscience was essentially anarchic. Habit and 
custom were so strong that, except in occasional outbreaks such as that of Munster, the disciples 
of individualism in ethics continued to act in a manner which was conventionally virtuous. But 
this was a precarious equilibrium. The eighteenth-century cult of "sensibility" began to break it 
down: an act was admired, not for its good consequences, or for its 



conformity to a moral code, but for the emotion that inspired it. Out of this attitude developed the 
cult of the hero, as it is expressed by Carlyle and Nietzsche, and the Byronic cult of violent 
passion of no matter what kind. 

The romantic movement, in art, in literature, and in politics, is bound up with this subjective way 
of judging men, not as members of a community, but as aesthetically delightful objects of 
contemplation. Tigers are more beautiful than sheep, but we prefer them behind bars. The typical 
romantic removes the bars and enjoys the magnificent leaps with which the tiger annihilates the 
sheep. He exhorts men to imagine themselves tigers, and when he succeeds the results are not 
wholly pleasant. 

Against the more insane forms of subjectivism in modem times there have been various reactions. 
First, a half-way compromise philosophy, the doctrine of liberalism, which attempted to assign the 
respective spheres of government and the individual. This begins, in its modem form, with Locke, 
who is as much opposed to "enthusiasm"— the individualism of the Anabaptists— as to absolute 
authority and blind subservience to tradition. A more thoroughgoing revolt leads to the doctrine of 
State worship, which assigns to the State the position that Catholicism gave to the Church, or 
even, sometimes, to God. Hobbes, Rousseau, and Hegel represent different phases of this theory, 
and their doctrines are embodied practically in Cromwell, Napoleon, and modern Gennany. 
Communism, in theory, is far removed from such philosophies, but is driven, in practice, to a type 
of community very similar to that which results from State worship. 

Throughout this long development, from 600 B.C. to the present day, philosophers have been 
divided into those who wished to tighten social bonds and those who wished to relax them. With 
this difference others have been associated. The disciplinarians have advocated some system, of 
dogma, either old or new, and have therefore been compelled to be, in a greater or less degree, 
hostile to science, since their dogmas could not be proved empirically. They have almost 
invariably taught that happiness is not the good, but that "nobility" or "heroism" is to be preferred. 
They have had a sympathy with the irrational parts of human nature, since they have felt reason to 
be inimical to social cohesion. The libertarians, on the other hand, with the exception of the 
extreme anarchists, have tended to be scientific, utilitarian, rationalistic, 



hostile to violent passion, and enemies of all the more profound forms of religion. This conflict 
existed in Greece before the rise of what we recognize as philosophy, and is already quite explicit 
in the earliest Greek thought. In changing forms, it has persisted down to the present day, and no 
doubt will persist for many ages to come. 

It is clear that each party to this dispute— as to all that persist through long periods of time— is 
partly right and partly wrong. Social cohesion is a necessity, and mankind has never yet succeeded 
in enforcing cohesion by merely rational arguments. Every community is exposed to two opposite 
dangers: ossification through too much discipline and reverence for tradition, on the one hand; on 
the other hand, dissolution, or subjection to foreign conquest, through the growth of an 
individualism and personal independence that makes co-operation impossible. In general, 
important civilizations start with a rigid and superstitious system, gradually relaxed, and leading, 
at a certain stage, to a period of brilliant genius, while the good of the old tradition remains and 
the evil inherent in its dissolution has not yet developed. But as the evil unfolds, it leads to 
anarchy, thence, inevitably, to a new tyranny, producing a new synthesis secured by a new system 
of dogma. The doctrine of liberalism is an attempt to escape from this endless oscillation. The 
essence of liberalism is an attempt to secure a social order not based on irrational dogma, and 
insuring stability without involving more restraints than are necessary for the preservation of the 
community. Whether this attempt can succeed only the future can determine. 


Book One ANCIENT PHILOSOPHY 



Part I. The Pre-Socratics 


CHAPTER I The Rise of Greek Civilization 

IN all history, nothing is so surprising or so difficult to account for as the sudden rise of 
civilization in Greece. Much of what makes civilization had already existed for thousands of 
years in Egypt and in Mesopotamia, and had spread thence to neighbouring countries. But 
certain elements had been lacking until the Greeks supplied them. What they achieved in art 
and literature is familiar to everybody, but what they did in the purely intellectual realm is even 
more exceptional. They invented mathematics jLand science and philosophy; they first wrote 
history as opposed to mere annals; they speculated freely about the nature of the world and the 
ends of life, without being bound in the fetters of any inherited orthodoxy. What occurred was 
so astonishing that, until very recent times, men were content to gape and talk mystically about 
the Greek genius. It is possible, however, to understand the development of Greece in scientific 
terms, and it is well worth while to do so. 

Philosophy begins with Thales, who, fortunately, can be dated by the fact that he predicted an 
eclipse which, according to the astronomers, occurred in the year 585 B.C. Philosophy and 
science— which were not originally separate— were therefore born together at the beginning of 
the sixth century. What had been happening in Greece and neighbouring countries before this 
time? Any answer must be in 


* Arithmetic and some geometry existed among the Egyptians and Babylonians, but mainly 
in the form of rules of thumb. Deductive reasoning from general premisses was a Greek 
innovation. 


part conjectural, but archeology, during the present century, has given us much more knowledge 
than was possessed by our grandfathers. 

The art of writing was invented in Egypt about the year 4000 B.C., and in Babylonia not much 
later. In each country writing began with pictures of the objects intended. These pictures quickly 
became conventionalized, so that words were represented by ideograms, as they still are in China. 
In the course of thousands of years, this cumbrous system developed into alphabetic writing. 

The early development of civilization in Egypt and Mesopotamia was due to the Nile, the Tigris, 
and the Euphrates, which made agriculture very easy and very productive. The civilization was in 
many ways similar to that which the Spaniards found in Mexico and Peru. There was a divine 
king, with despotic powers; in Egypt, he owned all the land. There was a polytheistic religion, 
with a supreme god to whom the king had a specially intimate relation. There was a military 
aristocracy, and also a priestly aristocracy. The latter was often able to encroach on the royal 
power, if the king was weak or if he was engaged in a difficult war. The cultivators of the soil 
were serfs, belonging to the king, the aristocracy, or the priesthood. 

There was a considerable difference between Egyptian and Babylonian theology. The Egyptians 
were preoccupied with death, and believed that the souls of the dead descend into the underworld, 
where they are judged by Osiris according to the manner of their life on earth. They thought that 
the soul would ultimately return to the body; this led to mummification and to the construction of 
splendid tombs. The pyramids were built by various kings at the end of the fourth millennium 
B.C. and the beginning of the third. After this time, Egyptian civilization became more and more 
stereotyped, and religious conservatism made progress impossible. About 1800 B.C. Egypt was 
conquered by Semites named Hyksos, who ruled the country for about two centuries. They left no 
pennanent mark on Egypt, but their presence there must have helped to spread Egyptian 
civilization in Syria and Palestine. 

Babylonia had a more warlike development than Egypt. At first, the ruling race were not Semites, 
but "Sumerians," whose origin is unknown. They invented cuneiform writing, which the 
conquering Semites took over from them. There was a period when there were various 
independent cities which fought with each other, but in the 



end Babylon became supreme and established an empire. The gods of other cities became 
subordinate, and Marduk, the god of Babylon, acquired a position like that later held by Zeus in 
the Greek pantheon. The same sort of thing had happened in Egypt, but at a much earlier time. 
The religions of Egypt and Babylonia, like other ancient religions, were originally fertility cults. 
The earth was female, the sun male. The bull was usually regarded as an embodiment of male 
fertility, and bullgods were common. In Babylon, Ishtar, the earth-goddess, was supreme among 
female divinities. Throughout western Asia, the Great Mother was worshipped under various 
names. When Greek colonists in Asia Minor found temples to her, they named her Artemis and 
took over the existing cult. This is the origin of "Diana of the Ephesians." ^Christianity 
transformed her into the Virgin Mary, and it was a Council at Ephesus that legitimated the title 
"Mother of God" as applied to Our Lady. Where a religion was bound up with the government 
of an empire, political motives did much to transform its primitive features. A god or goddess 
became associated with the State, and had to give, not only an abundant harvest, but victory in 
war. A rich priestly caste elaborated the ritual and the theology, and fitted together into a 
pantheon the several divinities of the component parts of the empire. Through association with 
government, the gods also became associated with morality. Lawgivers received their codes 
from a god; thus a breach of the law became an impiety. The oldest legal code still known is 
that of Hammurabi, king of Babylon, about 2100 B.C.; this code was asserted by the king to 
have been delivered to him by Marduk. The connection between religion and morality became 
continually closer throughout ancient times. 

Babylonian religion, unlike that of Egypt, was more concerned with prosperity in this world 
than with happiness in the next. Magic, divination, and astrology, though not peculiar to 
Babylonia, were more developed there than elsewhere, and it was chiefly through Babylon that 
they acquired their hold on later antiquity. From Babylon come some things that belong to 
science: the division of the day into twenty-four hours, and of the circle into 360 degrees; also 
the discovery of a cycle 


* Diana was the Latin equivalent of Artemis. It is Artemis who is mentioned in the Greek 
Testament where our translation speaks of Diana. 


in eclipses, which enabled lunar eclipses to be predicted with certainty, and solar eclipses with 
some probability. This Babylonian knowledge, as we shall see, was acquired by Thales. The 
civilizations of Egypt and Mesopotamia were agricultural, and those of surrounding nations, at 
first, were pastoral. A new element came with the development of commerce, which was at first 
almost entirely maritime. Weapons, until about 1000 B.C., were made of bronze, and nations 
which did not have the necessary metals on their own territory were obliged to obtain them by 
trade or piracy. Piracy was a temporary expedient, and where social and political conditions 
were fairly stable, commerce was found to be more profitable. In commerce, the island of Crete 
seems to have been the pioneer. For about eleven centuries, say from 2500 B.C., to 1400 B.C., 
an artistically advanced culture, called the Minoan, existed in Crete. What survives of Cretan art 
gives an impression of cheerfulness and almost decadent luxury, very different from the 
terrifying gloom of Egyptian temples. 

Of this important civilization almost nothing was known until the excavations of Sir Arthur 
Evans and others. It was a maritime civilization, in close touch with Egypt (except during the 
time of the Hyksos). From Egyptian pictures it is evident that the very considerable commerce 
between Egypt and Crete was carried on by Cretan sailors; this commerce reached its maximum 
about 1500 B.C. The Cretan religion appears to have had many affinities with the religions of 
Syria and Asia Minor, but in art there was more affinity with Egypt, though Cretan art was very 
original and amazingly full of life. The centre of the Cretan civilization was the so-called 
"palace of Minos" at Knossos, of which memories lingered in the traditions of classical Greece. 
The palaces of Crete were very magnificent, but were destroyed about the end of the fourteenth 
century B.C., probably by invaders from Greece. The chronology of Cretan history is derived 
from Egyptian objects found in Crete, and Cretan objects found in Egypt; throughout, our 
knowledge is dependent on archeological evidence. 

The Cretans worshipped a goddess, or perhaps several goddesses. The most indubitable goddess 
was the "Mistress of Animals," who was a huntress, and probably the source of the classical 
Artemis. * She 


* She has a male twin or consort, the "Master of Animals," but he is less prominent. It was at 
a later date that Artemis was identified with the Great Mother of Asia Minor. 


or another was also a mother; the only male deity, apart from the "Master of Animals," is her 
young son. There is some evidence of belief in an after life, in which, as in Egyptian belief, 
deeds on earth receive reward or retribution. But on the whole the Cretans appear, from their 
art, to have been cheerful people, not much oppressed by gloomy superstitions. They were fond 
of bull-fights, at which female as well as male toreadors perfonned amazing acrobatic feats. 

The bullfights were religious celebrations, and Sir Arthur Evans thinks that the performers 
belonged to the highest nobility. The surviving pictures are full of movement and realism. 

The Cretans had a linear script, but it has not been deciphered. At home they were peaceful, and 
their cities were unwalled; no doubt they were defended by sea power. 

Before the destruction of the Minoan culture, it spread, about 1600 B.C., to the mainland of 
Greece, where it survived, through gradual stages of degeneration, until about 900 B.C. This 
mainland civilization is called the Mycenaean; it is known through the tombs of kings, and also 
through fortresses on hill-tops, which show more fear of war than had existed in Crete. Both 
tombs and fortresses remained to impress the imagination of classical Greece. The older art 
products in the palaces are either actually of Cretan workmanship, or closely akin to those of 
Crete. The Mycenaean civilization, seen through a haze of legend, is that which is depicted in 
Homer. 

There is much uncertainty concerning the Mycenaeans. Did they owe their civilization to being 
conquered by the Cretans? Did they speak Greek, or were they an earlier indigenous race? No 
certain answer to these questions is possible, but on the whole it seems probable that they were 
conquerors who spoke Greek, and that at least the aristocracy consisted of fair-haired invaders 
from the North, who brought the Greek language with them. ^_The Greeks came to Greece in 
three successive waves, first the Ionians, then the Achaeans, and last the Dorians. The Ionians 
appear, though conquerors, to have adopted the Cretan civilization pretty completely, as, later, 
the Romans adopted the civilization of Greece. But the Ionians were disturbed, and largely 
dispossessed, by their successors the Achaeans. The Achaeans are 


* See The Minoan-Mycenaean Religion and Its Survival in Greek Religion, by Martin P. 
Nilsson, p. 1 1 ff. 


known, from the Hittite tablets found at Boghaz-Keui, to have had a large organized empire in the 
fourteenth century B.C. The Mycenaean civilization, which had been weakened by the warfare of 
the Ionians and Achaeans, was practically destroyed by the Dorians, the last Greek invaders. 
Whereas previous invaders had largely adopted the Minoan religion, the Dorians retained the 
original Indo-European religion of their ancestors. The religion of Mycenaean times, however, 
lingered on, especially in the lower classes, and the religion of classical Greece, was a blend of the 
two. 

Although the above account seems probable, it must be remembered that we do not know whether 
the Mycenaeans were Greeks or not. What we do know is that their civilization decayed, that 
about the time when it ended iron superseded bronze, and that for some time sea supremacy 
passed to the Phoenicians. 

Both during the later part of the Mycenaean age and after its end, some of the invaders settled 
down and became agriculturists, while some pushed on, first into the islands and Asia Minor, then 
into Sicily and southern Italy, where they founded cities that lived by maritime commerce. It was 
in these maritime cities that the Greeks first made qualitatively new contributions to civilization; 
the supremacy of Athens came later, and was equally associated, when it came, with naval power. 

The mainland of Greece is mountainous and largely infertile. But there are many fertile valleys, 
with easy access to the sea, but cut off by the mountains from easy land communication with each 
other. In these valleys little separate communities grew up, living by agriculture, and centering 
round a town, generally close to the sea. In such circumstances it was natural that, as soon as the 
population of any community grew too great for its internal resources, those who could not live on 
the land should take to seafaring. The cities of the mainland founded colonies, often in places 
where it was much easier to find subsistence than it had been at home. Thus in the earliest 
historical period the Greeks of Asia Minor, Sicily, and Italy were much richer than those of the 
Greek mainland. 

The social system was very different in different parts of Greece. In Sparta, a small aristocracy 
subsisted on the labour of oppressed serfs of a different race; in the poorer agricultural regions, the 
population consisted mainly of farmers cultivating their own land with the help 



of their families. But where commerce and industry flourished, the free citizens grew rich by the 
employment of slaves— male in the mines, female in the textile industry. These slaves were, in 
Ionia, of the surrounding barbarian population, and were, as a rule, first acquired in war. With 
increasing wealth went increasing isolation of respectable women, who in later times had little 
part in the civilized aspects of Greek life except in Sparta. 

There was a very general development, first from monarchy to aristocracy, then to an 
alternation of tyranny and democracy. The kings were not absolute, like those of Egypt and 
Babylonia; they were advised by a Council of Elders, and could not transgress custom with 
impunity. "Tyranny" did not mean necessarily bad government, but only the rule of a man 
whose claim to power was not hereditary. "Democracy" meant government by all the citizens, 
among whom slaves and women were not included. The early tyrants, like the Medici, acquired 
their power through being the richest members of their respective plutocracies. Often the source 
of their wealth was the ownership of gold and silver mines, made the more profitable by the 
new institution of coinage, which came from the kingdom of Lydia, adjacent to Ionia. * 

Coinage seems to have been invented shortly before 700 B.C. 

One of the most important results, to the Greeks, of commerce or piracy— at first the two are 
scarcely distinct— was the acquisition of the art of writing. Although writing had existed for 
thousands of years in Egypt and Babylonia, and the Minoan Cretans had a script (which has not 
been deciphered), there is no conclusive evidence that the Greeks knew how to write until about 
the tenth century B.C. They leamt the art from the Phoenicians, who, like the other inhabitants 
of Syria, were exposed to both Egyptian and Babylonian influences, and who held the 
supremacy in maritime commerce until the rise of the Greek cities of Ionia, Italy, and Sicily. In 
the fourteenth century, writing to Ikhnaton (the heretic king of Egypt), Syrians still used the 
Babylonian cuneifonn; but Hiram of Tyre ( 969-936) used the Phoenician alphabet, which 
probably developed out of the Egyptian script. The Egyptians used, at first, a pure picture 
writing; gradually the pictures, much conventionalized, came to represent 


* 


See P. N. Ure, The Origin of Tyranny. 


syllables (the first syllables of the names of the things pictured), and at last single letters, on the 
principle of "A was an Archer who shot at a frog." jyThis last step, which was not taken with 
any completeness by the Egyptians themselves, but by the Phoenicians, gave the alphabet with 
all its advantages. The Greeks, borrowing from the Phoenicians, altered the alphabet to suit 
their language, and made the important innovation of adding vowels instead of having only 
consonants. There can be no doubt that the acquisition of this convenient method of writing 
greatly hastened the rise of Greek civilization. 

The first notable product of the Hellenic civilization was Homer. Everything about Homer is 
conjectural, but the best opinion seems to be that he was a series of poets rather than an 
individual. Probably the Iliad and the Odyssey between them took about two hundred years to 

complete, some say from 750 to 550B.C., —while others hold that "Homer" was nearly 
complete at the end of the eighth century. a€j The Homeric poems, in their present form, were 
brought to Athens by Peisistratus, who reigned (with intermissions) from 560 to 527 B.C. From 
his time onward, the Athenian youth learnt Homer by heart, and this was the most important 
part of their education. In some parts of Greece, notably in Sparta, Homer had not the same 
prestige until a later date. 

The Homeric poems, like the courtly romances of the later Middle Ages, represent the point of 
view of a civilized aristocracy, which ignores as plebeian various superstitions that are still 
rampant among the populace. In much later times, many of these superstitions rose again to the 
light of day. Guided by anthropology, modern writers have come to the conclusion that Homer, 
so far from being primitive, was an expurgator, a kind of eighteenth-century rationalizer of 
ancient myths, holding up an upper-class ideal of urbane enlightenment. The Olympian gods, 
who represent religion in Homer, were not the only objects of worship among the Greeks, either 
in his time or later. There were other darker and more savage elements in popular religion, 
which were kept at bay by the Greek intellect at its best, but lay in wait to pounce in moments 
of weakness or terror. In the time of decadence, 


* For instance, "Gimel," the third letter of the Hebrew alphabet, means "camel," and the sign 
for it is a conventionalized picture of a camel. 

a 

£ Beloch, Griechische Geschichte, Chap. XII. 
a 

€ Rostovtseff, History of the Ancient World, Vol. I, p. 399. 
i 


beliefs which Homer had discarded proved to have persisted, half buried, throughout the 
classical period. This fact explains many things that would otherwise seem inconsistent and 
surprising. 

Primitive religion, everywhere, was tribal rather than personal. Certain rites were performed, 
which were intended, by sympathetic magic, to further the interests of the tribe, especially in 
respect of fertility, vegetable, animal, and human. The winter solstice was a time when the sun 
had to be encouraged not to go on diminishing in strength; spring and harvest also called for 
appropriate ceremonies. These were often such as to generate a great collective excitement, in 
which individuals lost their sense of separateness and felt themselves at one with the whole 
tribe. All over, the world, at a certain stage of religious evolution, sacred animals and human 
beings were ceremonially killed and eaten. In different regions, this stage occurred at very 
different dates. Human sacrifice usually lasted longer than the sacrificial eating of human 
victims; in Greece it was not yet extinct at the beginning of historical times. Fertility rites 
without such cruel aspects were common throughout Greece; the Eleusinian mysteries, in 
particular, were essentially agricultural in their symbolism. 

It must be admitted that religion, in Homer, is not very religious. The gods are completely 
human, differing from men only in being immortal and possessed of superhuman powers. 
Morally, there is nothing to be said for them, and it is difficult to see how they can have 
inspired much awe. In some passages, supposed to be late, they are treated with Voltairean 
irreverence. Such genuine religious feeling as is to be found in Homer is less concerned with 
the gods of Olympus than with more shadowy beings such as Fate or Necessity or Destiny, to 
whom even Zeus is subject. Fate exercised a great influence on all Greek thought, and perhaps 
was one of the sources from which science derived the belief in natural law. 

The Homeric gods were the gods of a conquering aristocracy, not the useful fertility gods of 
those who actually tilled the soil. As Gilbert Murray says: 

"The gods of most nations claim to have created the world. The Olympians make no such claim. 
The most they ever did was to conquer it. . . . And when they have conquered their kingdoms, 
what do they do? Do they attend to the government? Do they promote 


* Five Stages of Greek Religion, p. 67. 


agriculture? Do they practise trades and industries? Not a bit of it. Why should they do any 
honest work? They find it easier to live on the revenues and blast with thunderbolts the people 
who do not pay. They are conquering chieftains, royal buccaneers. They fight, and feast, and 
play, and make music; they drink deep, and roar with laughter at the lame smith who waits on 
them. They are never afraid, except of their own king. They never tell lies, except in love and 
war." 

Homer's human heroes, equally, are not very well behaved. The leading family is the House of 
Pelops, but it did not succeed in setting a pattern of happy family life. 

"Tantalos, the Asiatic founder of the dynasty, began its career by a direct offence against the 
gods; some said, by trying to cheat them into eating human flesh, that of his own son Pelops. 
Pelops, having been miraculously restored to life, offended in his turn. He won his famous 
chariot-race against Oinomaos, king of Pisa, by the connivance of the latter's charioteer, 
Myrtilos, and then got rid of his confederate, whom he had promised to reward, by flinging him 
into the sea. The curse descended to his sons, Atreus and Thyestes, in the form of what the 
Greeks called ate, a strong if not actually irresistible impulse to crime. Thyestes corrupted his 
brother's wife and thereby managed to steal the 'luck' of the family, the famous golden-fleeced 
ram. Atreus in turn secured his brother's banishment, and recalling him under pretext of a 
reconciliation, feasted him on the flesh of his own children. The curse was now inherited by 
Atreus' son Agamemnon, who offended Artemis by killing a sacred stag, sacrificed his own 
daughter Iphigenia to appease the goddess and obtain a safe passage to Troy for his fleet, and 
was in his turn murdered by his faithless wife Klytaimnestra and her paramour Aigisthos, a 
surviving son of Thyestes. Orestes, Agamemnon's son, in turn avenged his father by killing his 
mother and Aigisthos." 

Homer as a finished achievement was a product of Ionia, i.e. of a part of Hellenic Asia Minor 
and the adjacent islands. Some time during the sixth century at latest, the Homeric poems 
became fixed in their present form. It was also during this century that Greek science and 
philosophy and mathematics began. At the same time events of fundamental importance were 
happening in other parts of the world. Confucius, Buddha, and Zoroaster, if they existed, 
probably belong to 


* Primitive Culture in Greece, H. J. Rose, 1925, p. 193. 


- 12 - 


the same century. Mn the middle of the century the Persian Empire was established by Cyrus; 
towards its close the Greek cities of Ionia, to which the Persians had allowed a limited 
autonomy, made a fruitless rebellion, which was put down by Darius, and their best men 
became exiles. Several of the philosophers of this period were refugees, who wandered from 
city to city in the still unenslaved parts of the Hellenic world, spreading the civilization that, 
until then, had been mainly confined to Ionia. They were kindly treated in their wanderings. 
Xenophanes, who flourished in the later part of the sixth century, and who was one of the 
refugees, says: "This is the sort of thing we should say by the fireside in the winter-time, as we 
lie on soft couches, after a good meal, drinking sweet wine and crunching chickpeas: ’Of what 
country are you, and how old are you, good Sir? And how old were you when the Mede 
appeared?'" The rest of Greece succeeded in preserving its independence at the battles of 
Salamis and Plataea, after which Ionia was liberated for a time. — 

Greece was divided into a large number of small independent states, each consisting of a city 
with some agricultural territory surrounding it. The level of civilization was very different in 
different parts of the Greek world, and only a minority of cities contributed to the total of 
Hellenic achievement. Sparta, of which I shall have much to say later, was important in a 
military sense, but not culturally. Corinth was rich and prosperous, a great commercial centre, 
but not prolific in great men. 

Then there were purely agricultural rural communities, such as the proverbial Arcadia, which 
townsmen imagined to be idyllic, but which really was full of ancient barbaric horrors. 

The inhabitants worshipped Pan, and had a multitude of fertility cults, in which, often, a mere 
square pillar did duty in place of a statue of the god. The goat was the symbol of fertility, 
because the peasants were too poor to possess bulls. When food was scarce, the statue of Pan 
was beaten. (Similar things are still done in remote Chinese villages.) There was a clan of 
supposed were-wolves, associated, probably, 


* Zoroaster's date, however, is very conjectural. Some place it as early as 1000 B.C. See 
Cambridge Ancient History, Vol. IV, p. 207. 

a As a result of the defeat of Athens by Sparta, the Persians regained the whole coast of Asia 
£ Minor, to which their right was acknowledged in the Peace of Antalcidas ( 387-86B.C.). 
About fifty years later, they were incorporated in Alexander's empire. 


- 13 - 


with human sacrifice and cannibalism. It was thought that whoever tasted the flesh of a 
sacrificed human victim became a werewolf. There was a cave sacred to Zeus Lykaios (the 
wolf-Zeus); in this cave no one had a shadow, and whoever entered it died within a year. All 
this superstition was still flourishing in classical times. 

Pan, whose original name was "Paon," meaning the feeder or shepherd, acquired his better 
known title, interpreted as meaning the All-God, when his worship was adopted by Athens in 

the fifth century, after the Persian war. 

There was, however, in ancient Greece, much that we can feel to have been religion as we 
understand the tenn. This was connected, not with the Olympians, but with Dionysus, or 
Bacchus, whom we think of most naturally as the somewhat disreputable god of wine and 
drunkenness. The way in which, out of his worship, there arose a profound mysticism, which 
greatly influenced many of the philosophers, and even had a part in shaping Christian theology, 
is very remarkable, and must be understood by anyone who wishes to study the development of 
Greek thought. 

Dionysus, or Bacchus, was originally a Thracian god. The Thracians were very much less 
civilized than the Greeks, who regarded them as barbarians. Like all primitive agriculturists, 
they had fertility cults, and a god who promoted fertility. His name was Bacchus. It was never 
quite clear whether Bacchus had the shape of a man or of a bull. When they discovered how to 
make beer, they thought intoxication divine, and gave honor to Bacchus. When, later, they came 
to know the vine and to leam to drink wine, they thought even better of him. His functions in 
promoting fertility in general became somewhat subordinate to his functions in relation to the 
grape and the divine madness produced by wine. 

At what date his worship migrated from Thrace to Greece is not known, but it seems to have 
been just before the beginning of historical times. The cult of Bacchus was met with hostility by 
the orthodox, but nevertheless it established itself. It contained many barbaric elements, such as 
tearing wild animals to pieces and eating the whole of them raw. It had a curious element of 
feminism. Respectable matrons and maids, in large companies, would spend whole nights on 
the bare 


* Rose, Primitive Greece, p. 65 ff. 
a 

„ J. E. Harrison, Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion, p. 651. 


hills, dances which stimulated ecstasy, and in an intoxication perhaps partly alcoholic, but mainly 
mystical. Husbands found the practice annoying, but did not dare to oppose religion. Both the 
beauty and the savagery of the cult are set forth in the Bacchae of Euripides. 

The success of Bacchus in Greece is not surprising. Like all communities that have been civilized 
quickly, the Greeks, or at least a certain proportion of them, developed a love of the primitive, and 
a hankering after a more instinctive and passionate way of life than that sanctioned by current 
morals. To the man or woman who, by compulsion, is more civilized in behaviour than in feeling, 
rationality is irksome and virtue is felt as a burden and a slavery. This leads to a reaction in 
thought, in feeling, and in conduct. It is the reaction in thought that will specially concern us, but 
something must first be said about the reaction in feeling and conduct. 

The civilized man is distinguished from the savage mainly by prudence, or, to use a slightly wider 
tenn, forethought. He is willing to endure present pains for the sake of future pleasures, even if 
the future pleasures are rather distant. This habit began to be important with the rise of agriculture; 
no animal and no savage would work in the spring in order to have food next winter, except for a 
few purely instinctive forms of action, such as bees making honey or squirrels burying nuts. In 
these cases, there is no forethought; there is a direct impulse to an act which, to the human 
spectator, is obviously going to prove useful later on. True forethought only arises when a man 
does something towards which no impulse urges him, because his reason tells him that he will 
profit by it at some future date. Hunting requires no forethought, because it is pleasurable; but 
tilling the soil is labour, and cannot be done from spontaneous impulse. 

Civilization checks impulse not only through forethought, which is a self-administered check, but 
also through law, custom, and religion. This check it inherits from barbarism, but it makes it less 
instinctive and more systematic. Certain acts are labelled criminal, and are punished; certain 
others, though not punished by law, are labelled wicked, and expose those who are guilty of them 
to social disapproval. The institution of private property brings with it the subjection of women, 
and usually the creation of a slave class. On the one hand the purposes of the community are 
enforced upon the individual, and, on the other hand the individual, having acquired 



the habit of viewing his life as a whole, increasingly sacrifices his present to his future. 

It is evident that this process can be carried too far, as it is, for instance, by the miser. But 
without going to such extremes, prudence may easily involve the loss of some of the best things 
in life. The worshipper of Bacchus reacts against prudence. In intoxication, physical or spiritual, 
he recovers an intensity of feeling which prudence had destroyed; he finds the world full of 
delight and beauty, and his imagination is suddenly liberated from the prison of every-day 
preoccupations. The Bacchic ritual produced what was called "enthusiasm," which means, 
etymologically, having the god enter into the worshipper, who believed that he became one with 
the god. Much of what is greatest in human achievement involves some element of intoxication, 
f_some sweeping away of prudence by passion. Without the Bacchic element, life would be 
uninteresting; with it, it is dangerous. Prudence versus passion is a conflict that runs through 
history. It is not a conflict in which we ought to side wholly with either party. 

In the sphere of thought, sober civilization is roughly synonymous with science. But science, 
unadulterated, is not satisfying; men need also passion and art and religion. Science may set 
limits to knowledge, but should not set limits to imagination. Among Greek philosophers, as 
among those of later times, there were those who were primarily scientific and those who were 
primarily religious; the latter owed much, directly or indirectly, to the religion of Bacchus. This 
applies especially to Plato, and through him to those later developments which were ultimately 
embodied in Christian theology. 

The worship of Bacchus in its original form was savage, and in many ways repulsive. It was not 
in this fonn that it influenced the philosophers, but in the spiritualized form attributed to 
Orpheus, which was ascetic, and substituted mental for physical intoxication. 

Orpheus is a dim but interesting figure. Some hold that he was an actual man, others that he was 
a god or an imaginary hero. Traditionally, he came from Thrace, like Bacchus, but it seems 
more probable that he (or the movement associated with his name) came from Crete. It is 
certain that Orphic doctrines contain much that seems to have its first source in Egypt, and it 
was chiefly through Crete that 


* 


I mean mental intoxication, not intoxication by alcohol. 


Egypt influenced Greece. Orpheus is said to have been a refonner who was tom to pieces by 
frenzied Maenads actuated by Bacchic orthodoxy. His addiction to music is not so prominent in 
the older forms of the legend as it became later. Primarily he was a priest and a philosopher. 
Whatever may have been the teaching of Orpheus (if he existed), the teaching of the Orphics is 
well known. They believed in the transmigration of souls; they taught that the soul hereafter 
might achieve eternal bliss or suffer eternal or temporary torment according to its way of life 
here on earth. They aimed at becoming "pure," partly by ceremonies of purification, partly by 
avoiding certain kinds of contamination. The most orthodox among them abstained from animal 
food, except on ritual occasions when they ate it sacramentally. Man, they held, is partly of 
earth, partly of heaven; by a pure life theheavenly part is increased and the earthly part 
diminished. In the end a man may become one with Bacchus, and is called "a Bacchus." There 
was an elaborate theology, according to which Bacchus was twice born, once of his mother 
Semele, and once from the thigh of his father Zeus. 

There are many forms of the Bacchus myth. In one of them, Bacchus is the son of Zeus and 
Persephone; while still a boy, he is torn to pieces by Titans, who eat his flesh, all but the heart. 
Some say that the heart was given by Zeus to Semele, others that Zeus swallowed it; in either 
case, it gave rise to the second birth of Bacchus. The tearing of a wild animal and the devouring 
of its raw flesh by Bacchae was supposed to re-enact the tearing and eating of Bacchus by the 
Titans, and the animal, in some sense, was an incarnation of the God. The Titans were earth- 
bom, but after eating the god they had a spark of divinity. So man is partly of earth, partly 
divine, and Racchic rites sought to make him more nearly completely divine. 

Euripides puts a confession into the mouth of an Orphic priest, which is instructive: 

Lord of Europa's Tyrian line, Zeus-bom, who holdest at thy feet The hundred citadels of Crete, I 

seek to Thee from that dim shrine, 


* 


The verse translations in this chapter are by Professor Gilbert Murray. 


Roofed by the Quick and Carven Beam, By Chalyb steel and wild bull's blood. In flawless 
joints of Cypress wood Made steadfast. There in one pure stream 

My days have run. The servant I, Initiate, of Idaean Jove; Where midnight Zagreus Proves, I 

rove; I have endured his thunder-cry; 

Fulfilled his red and bleeding feasts; Held the Great Mother's mountain flame; I am set free and 

named by name A Bacchos of the Mailed Priests. 

Robed in pure white I have borne me clean From man's vile birth and coffined clay, And exiled 
from my lips alway Touch of all meat where Life hath been. 

Orphic tablets have been found in tombs, giving instructions to the soul of the dead person as to 
how to find his way in the next world, and what to say in order to prove himself worthy of 
salvation. They are broken and incomplete; the most nearly complete (the Petelia tablet) is as 
follows: 

Thou shalt find on the left of the House of Hades a Well-spring, And by the side thereof 
standing a white cypress. To this well-spring approach not near. But thou shalt find another by 
the Lake of Memory, Cold water flowing forth, and there are Guardians before it. Say: "I am a 
child of Earth and of Starry Heaven; But my race is of Heaven (alone). This ye kn ow 
yourselves. And lo, I am parched with thirst and I perish. Give me quickly The cold water 
flowing forth from the Lake of Memory." And of themselves they will give thee to drink from 
the holy well-spring, And thereafter among the other heroes thou shalt have lordship. . . . 


* Mystically identified with Bacchus, 
a 

e One of the many names of Bacchus. 


Another tablet says:— "Hail, Thou who has suffered the suffering . . . Thou art become God from 
Man." And yet in another:— "Happy and Blessed One, thou shalt be God instead of mortal." 

The well-spring of which the soul is not to drink is Lethe, which brings forgetfulness; the other 
well-spring is Mnemosyne, remembrance. The soul in the next world, if it is to achieve salvation, 
is not to forget, but, on the contrary, to acquire a memory surpassing what is natural. 

The Orphics were an ascetic sect; wine, to them, was only a symbol, as, later, in the Christian 
sacrament. The intoxication that they sought was that of "enthusiasm," of union with the god. 

They believed themselves, in this way, to acquire mystic knowledge not obtainable by ordinary 
means. This mystical element entered into Greek philosophy with Pythagoras, who was a reformer 
of Orphism, as Orpheus was a reformer of the religion of Bacchus. From Pythagoras Orphic 
elements entered into the philosophy of Plato, and from Plato into most later philosophy that was 
in any degree religious. 

Certain definitely Bacchic elements survived wherever Orphism had influence. One of these was 
feminism, of which there was much in Pythagoras, and which, in Plato, went so far as to claim 
complete political equality for women. "Women as a sex," says Pythagoras, "are more naturally 
akin to piety." Another Bacchic element was respect for violent emotion. Greek tragedy grew out 
of the rites of Dionysus. Euripides, especially, honoured the two chief gods of Orphism, Bacchus 
and Eros. He has no respect for the coldly self-righteous well-behaved man, who, in his tragedies, 
is apt to be driven mad or otherwise brought to grief by the gods in resentment of his blasphemy. 

The conventional tradition concerning the Greeks is that they exhibited an admirable serenity, 
which enabled them to contemplate passion from without, perceiving whatever beauty it 
exhibited, but themselves calm and Olympian. This is a very one-sided view. It is true, perhaps, of 
Homer, Sophocles, and Aristotle, but it is emphatically not true of those Greeks who were 
touched, directly or indirectly, by Bacchic or Orphic influences. At Eleusis, where the Eleusinian 
mysteries fonned the most sacred part of Athenian State religion, a hymn was sung, saying: 



With Thy wine-cup waving high, With Thy maddening revelry, To Eleusis' flowery vale, Comest 
Thou— Bacchus, Paean, hail! 

In the Bacchae of Euripides, the chorus of Maenads displays a combination of poetry and 
savagery which is the very reverse of serene. They celebrate the delight in tearing a wild animal 
limb from limb, and eating it raw then and there: 

O glad, glad on the Mountains To swoon in the race outworn, When the holy fawn-skin clings 
And all else sweeps away, 

To the joy of the quick red fountains. The blood of the hill-goat tom, The glory of wild-beast 
ravenings Where the hill-top catches the day, 

To the Phrygian, Lydian mountains ’Tis Bromios leads the way. 

( Bromios was another of the many names of Bacchus.) The dance of the Maenads on the 
mountain side was not only fierce; it was an escape from the burdens and cares of civilization into 
the world of nonhuman beauty and the freedom of wind and stars. In a less frenzied mood they 
sing: 

Will they ever come to me, ever again, The long, long dances, On through the dark till the dim 
stars wane? Shall I feel the dew on my throat and the stream Of wind in my hair? Shall our white 
feet gleam In the dim expanses? O feet of the fawn to the greenwood fled, Alone in the grass and 
the loveliness; Leap of the hunted, no more in dread, Beyond the snares and the deadly press. Yet 
a voice still in the distance sounds, A voice and a fear and a haste of hounds, O wildly labouring, 
fiercely fleet, Onward yet by river and lien— 



Is it joy or terror, ye storm-swift feet? To the dear lone lands untroubled of men, Where no voice 
sounds, and amid the shadowy green The little things of the woodland live unseen. 


Before repeating that the Greeks were "serene," try to imagine the matrons of Philadelphia 
behaving in this manner, even in a play by Eugene O’Neill. 

The Orphic is no more "serene" than the unreformed worshipper of Bacchus. To the Orphic, life in 
this world is pain and weariness. We are bound to a wheel which turns through endless cycles of 
birth and death; our true life is of the stars, but we are tied to earth. Only by purification and 
renunciation and an ascetic life can we escape from the wheel and attain at last to the ecstasy of 
union with God. This is not the view of men to whom life is easy and pleasant. It is more like the 
Negro spiritual: 


I'm going to tell God all of my troubles When I get home. 

Not all of the Greeks, but a large proportion of them, were passionate, unhappy, at war with 
themselves, driven along one road by the intellect and along another by the passions, with the 
imagination to conceive heaven and the wilful self-assertion that creates hell. They had a maxim 
"nothing too much," but they were in fact excessive in everything— in pure thought, in poetry, in 
religion, and in sin. It was the combination of passion and intellect that made them great, while 
they were great. Neither alone would have transfonned the world for all future time as they 
transformed it. Their prototype in mythology is not Olympian Zeus, but Prometheus, who brought 
fire from heaven and was rewarded with eternal tonnent. 

If taken as characterizing the Greeks as a whole, however, what has just been said would be as 
one-sided as the view that the Greeks were characterized by "serenity." There were, in fact, two 
tendencies in Greece, one passionate, religious, mystical, other-worldly, the other cheerful, 
empirical, rationalistic, and interested in acquiring knowledge of a diversity of facts. Herodotus 
represents this latter tendency; so do the earliest Ionian philosophers; so, up to a point, does 
Aristotle. Beloch {op. cit. I, 1, p. 434), after describing Orphism, says: 



"But the Greek nation was too full of youthful vigour for the general acceptance of a belief which 
denies this world and transfers real life to the Beyond. Accordingly the Orphic doctrine remained 
confined to the relatively narrow circle of the initiate, without acquiring the smallest influence on 
the State religion, not even in communities which, like Athens, had taken up the celebration of the 
mysteries into the State ritual and placed it under legal protection. A full millennium was to pass 
before these ideas— in a quite different theological dress, it is true— achieved victory in the Greek 
world." 

It would seem that this is an overstatement, particularly as regards the Eleusinian mysteries, which 
were impregnated with Orphism. Broadly speaking, those who were of a religious temperament 
turned to Orphism, while rationalists despised it. One might compare its status to that of 
Methodism in England in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. 

We know more or less what an educated Greek learnt from his father, but we know very little of 
what, in his earliest years, he leamt from his mother, who was, to a great extent, shut out from the 
civilization in which the men took delight. It seems probable that educated Athenians, even in the 
best period, however rationalistic they may have been in their explicitly conscious mental 
processes, retained from tradition and from childhood a more primitive way of thinking and 
feeling, which was always liable to prove victorious in times of stress. For this reason, no simple 
analysis of the Greek outlook is likely to be adequate. 

The influence of religion, more particularly of non-Olympian religion, on Greek thought was not 
adequately recognized until recent times. A revolutionary book, Jane Harrison Prolegomena to 
the Study of Greek Religion, emphasized both the primitive and the Dionysiac elements in the 
religion of ordinary Greeks; F. M. Cornford's From Religion to Philosophy tried to make students 
of Greek philosophy aware of the influence of religion on the philosophers, but cannot be wholly 
accepted as trustworthy in many of its interpretations, or, for that matter, in its anthropology. The 
most balanced statement known to me is in John Bumet Early Greek Philosophy, especially 
Chapter II, "Science and Religion." A conflict between science and religion arose, he says, out of 
"the religious revival which 



swept over Hellas in the sixth century B.C.," together with the shifting of the scene from Ionia to 
the West. "The religion of continental Hellas," he says, "had developed in a very different way 
from that of Ionia. In particular, the worship of Dionysus, which came from Thrace, and is barely 
mentioned in Homer, contained in germ a wholly new way of looking at man’s relation to the 
world. It would certainly be wrong to credit the Thracians themselves with any very exalted 
views; but there can be no doubt that, to the Greeks, the phenomenon of ecstasy suggested that the 
soul was something more than a feeble double of the self, and that it was only when 'out of the 
body' that it could show its true nature. . . . 

"It looked as if Greek religion were about to enter on the same stage as that already reached by the 
religions of the East; and, but for the rise of science, it is hard to see what could have checked this 
tendency. It is usual to say that the Greeks were saved from a religion of the Oriental type by their 
having no priesthood; but this is to mistake the effect for the cause. Priesthoods do not make 
dogmas, though they preserve them once they are made; and in the earlier stages of their 
development, the Oriental peoples had no priesthoods either in the sense intended. It was not so 
much the absence of a priesthood as the existence of the scientific schools that saved Greece. 

"The new religion— for in one sense it was new, though in another as old as mankind— reached its 
highest point of development with the foundation of the Orphic communities. So far as we can 
see, the original home of these was Attika; but they spread with extraordinary rapidity, especially 
in Southern Italy and Sicily. They were first of all associations for the worship of Dionysus; but 
they were distinguished by two features which were new among the Hellenes. They looked to a 
revelation as the source of religious authority, and they were organized as artificial communities. 
The poems which contained their theology were ascribed to the Thracian Orpheus, who had 
himself descended into Hades, and was therefore a safe guide through the perils which beset the 
disembodied soul in the next world." Burnet goes on to state that there is a striking similarity 
between Orphic beliefs and those prevalent in India at about the same time, though he holds that 
there cannot have been any contact. He then comes on to the original meaning of the word "orgy," 
which was used 



by the Orphics to mean "sacrament," and was intended to purify the believer's soul and enable it 
to escape from the wheel of birth. The Orphics, unlike the priests of Olympian cults, founded 
what we may call "churches," i.e. religious communities to which anybody, without distinction 
of race or sex, could be admitted by initiation, and from their influence arose the conception of 
philosophy as a way of life. 


CHAPTER II The Milesian School 

IN every history of philosophy for students, the first thing mentioned is that philosophy began 
with Thales, who said that everything is made of water. This is discouraging to the beginner, 
who is struggling— perhaps not very hard— to feel that respect for philosophy which the 
curriculum seems to expect. There is, however, ample reason to feel respect for Thales, though 
perhaps rather as a man of science than as a philosopher in the modern sense of the word. 

Thales was a native of Miletus, in Asia Minor, a flourishing commercial city, in which there 
was a large slave population, and a bitter class struggle between the rich and poor among the 
free population. "At Miletus the people were at first victorious and murdered the wives and 
children of the aristocrats; then the aristocrats prevailed and burned their opponents alive, 
lighting up the open spaces of the city with live torches." ^Similar conditions prevailed in most 
of the Greek cities of Asia Minor at the time of Thales. 

Miletus, like other commercial cities of Ionia, underwent important economic and political 
developments during the seventh and sixth centuries. At first, political power belonged to a 
land-owning aristocracy, but this was gradually replaced by a plutocracy of merchants. They, in 
turn, were replaced by a tyrant, who (as was usual) achieved power by the support of the 
democratic party. The kingdom of Lydia 


lay to the east of the Greek coast towns, but remained on friendly terms with them until the fall of 
Nineveh (612 B.C.). This left Lydia free to turn its attention to the West, but Miletus usually 
succeeded in preserving friendly relations, especially with Croesus, the last Lydian king, who was 
conquered by Cyrus in 546 B.C. There were also important relations with Egypt, where the king 
depended upon Greek mercenaries, and had opened certain cities to Greek trade. The first Greek 
settlement in Egypt was a fort occupied by a Milesian garrison; but the most important, during the 
period 610-560 B.C., was Daphnae. Here Jeremiah and many other Jewish refugees took refuge 
from Nebuchadrezzar ( Jeremiah 43:5 ff); but while Egypt undoubtedly influenced the Greeks, the 
Jews did not, nor can we suppose that Jeremiah felt anything but horror towards the sceptical 
Ionians. 

As regards the date of Thales, the best evidence, as we saw, is that he was famous for predicting 
an eclipse which, according to the astronomers, must have taken place in 585 B.C. Other 
evidence, such as it is, agrees in placing his activities at about this time. It is no proof of 
extraordinary genius on his part to have predicted an eclipse. Miletus was allied with Lydia, and 
Lydia had cultural relations with Babylonia, and Babylonian astronomers had discovered that 
eclipses recur in a cycle of about nineteen years. They could predict eclipses of the moon with 
pretty complete success, but as regards solar eclipses they were hampered by the fact that an 
eclipse may be visible in one place and not in another. Consequently they could only know that at 
such and such a date it was worth while to look out for an eclipse, and this is probably all that 
Thales knew. Neither he nor they knew why there is this cycle. 

Thales is said to have travelled in Egypt, and to have thence brought to the Greeks the science of 
geometry. What the Egyptians knew of geometry was mainly rules of thumb, and there is no 
reason to believe that Thales arrived at deductive proofs, such as later Greeks discovered. He 
seems to have discovered how to calculate the distance of a ship at sea from observations taken at 
two points on land, and how to estimate the height of a pyramid from the length of its shadow. 
Many other geometrical theorems are attributed to him, but probably wrongly. 


He was one of the Seven Wise Men of Greece, each of whom was 



specially noted for one wise saying; his, according to tradition, was "water is best." 

According to Aristotle, he thought that water is the original substance, out of which all others 
are formed; and he maintained that the earth rests on water. Aristotle also says of him that he 
said the magnet has a soul in it, because it moves the iron; further, that all things are full of 
gods. 

The statement that everything is made of water is to be regarded as a scientific hypothesis, and 
by no means a foolish one. Twenty years ago, the received view was that everything is made of 
hydrogen, which is two thirds of water. The Greeks were rash in their hypotheses, but the 
Milesian school, at least, was prepared to test them empirically. Too little is kn own of Thales to 
make it possible to reconstruct him at all satisfactorily, but of his successors in Miletus much 
more is known, and it is reasonable to suppose that something of their outlook came from him. 
His science and his philosophy were both crude, but they were such as to stimulate both thought 
and observation. 

There are many legends about him, but I do not think more is known than the few facts I have 
mentioned. Some of the stories are pleasant, for instance, the one told by Aristotle in his 
Politics (1259a): "He was reproached for his poverty, which was supposed to show that 
philosophy is of no use. According to the story, he knew by his skill in the stars while it was yet 
winter that there would be a great harvest of olives in the coming year; so, having a little 
money, he gave deposits for the use of all the olive-presses in Chios and Miletus, which he 
hired at a low price because no one bid against him. When the harvest time came, and many 
were wanted all at once and of a sudden, he let them out at any rate which he pleased, and made 
a quantity of money. Thus he showed the world that philosophers can easily be rich if they like, 
but that their ambition is of another sort." 

Anaximander, the second philosopher of the Milesian school, is much more interesting than 
Thales. His dates are uncertain, but he was said to have been sixty-four years old in 546 B.C., 
and there is reason to suppose that this is somewhere near the truth. He held that all things come 
from a single primal substance, but that it is not water, as Thales held, or any other of the 
substances that we know. It is infinite, eternal 


* 


Burnet ( Early Greek Philosophy, p. 51) questions this last saying. 


and ageless, and "it encompasses all the worlds"— for he thought our world only one of many. The 
primal substance is transformed into the various substances with which we are familiar, and these 
are transformed into each other. As to this, he makes an important and remarkable statement: 

"Into that from which things take their rise they pass away once more, as is ordained, for they 
make reparation and satisfaction to one another for their injustice according to the ordering of 
time." 

The idea of justice, both cosmic and human, played a part in Greek religion and philosophy which 
is not altogether easy for a modern to understand; indeed our word "justice" hardly expresses what 
is meant, but it is difficult to find any other word that would be preferable. The thought which 
Anaximander is expressing seems to be this: there should be a certain proportion of fire, of earth, 
and of water in the world, but each element (conceived as a god) is perpetually attempting to 
enlarge its empire. But there is a kind of necessity or natural law which perpetually redresses the 
balance; where there has been fire, for example, there are ashes, which are earth. This conception 
of justice —of not overstepping eternally fixed bounds— was one of the most profound of Greek 
beliefs. The gods were subject to justice just as much as men were, but this supreme power was 
not itself personal, and was not a supreme God. 

Anaximander had an argument to prove that the primal substance could not be water, or any other 
known element. If one of these were primal, it would conquer the others. Aristotle reports him as 
saying that these known elements are in opposition to one another. Air is cold, water is moist, and 
fire is hot. "And therefore, if any one of them were infinite, the rest would have ceased to be by 
this time." The primal substance, therefore, must be neutral in this cosmic strife. 

There was an eternal motion, in the course of which was brought about the origin of the worlds. 
The worlds were not created, as in Jewish or Christian theology, but evolved. There was evolution 
also in the animal kingdom. Living creatures arose from the moist element as it was evaporated by 
the sun. Man, like every other animal, was descended from fishes. He must be derived from 
animals of a different sort, because, owing to his long infancy, he could not have survived, 
originally, as he is now. 


Anaximander was full of scientific curiosity. He is said to have been 



the first man who made a map. He held that the earth is shaped like a cylinder. He is variously 
reported as saying the sun is as large as the earth, or twenty-seven times as large, or twenty-eight 
times as large. 

Wherever he is original, he is scientific and rationalistic. 

Anaximenes, the last of the Milesian triad, is not quite so interesting as Anaximander, but makes 
some important advances. His dates are very uncertain. He was certainly subsequent to 
Anaximander, and he certainly flourished before 494 B.C., since in that year Miletus was 
destroyed by the Persians in the course of their suppression of the Ionian revolt. 

The fundamental substance, he said, is air. The soul is air; fire is rarefied air; when condensed, air 
becomes first water, then, if further condensed, earth, and finally stone. This theory has the merit 
of making all the differences between different substances quantitative, depending entirely upon 
the degree of condensation. 

He thought that the earth is shaped like a round table, and that air encompasses everything: "Just 
as our soul, being air, holds us together, so do breath and air encompass the whole world." It 
seems that the world breathes. 

Anaximenes was more admired in antiquity than Anaximander, though almost any modem world 
would make the opposite valuation. He had an important influence on Pythagoras and on much 
subsequent speculation. The Pythagoreans discovered that the earth is spherical, but the atomists 
adhered to the view of Anaximenes, that it is shaped like a disc. 

The Milesian school is important, not for what it achieved, but for what it attempted. It was 
brought into existence by the contact of the Greek mind with Babylonia and Egypt. Miletus was a 
rich commercial city, in which primitive prejudices and superstitions were softened by intercourse 
with many nations. Ionia, until its subjugation by Darius at the beginning of the fifth century, was 
culturally the most important part of the Hellenic world. It was almost untouched by the religious 
movement connected with Bacchus and Orpheus; its religion was Olympic, but seems to have 
been not taken very seriously. The speculations of Thales, Anaximander, and Anaximenes are to 
be regarded as scientific hypotheses, and seldom show any undue intrusion of anthropomorphic 
desires and moral ideas. The questions they asked 



were good questions, and their vigour inspired subsequent investigators. 

The next stage in Greek philosophy, which is associated with the Greek cities in southern Italy, is 
more religious, and, in particular, more Orphic— in some ways more interesting, admirable in 
achievement, but in spirit less scientific than that of the Milesians. 

CHAPTER III Pythagoras 

PYTHAGORAS, whose influence in ancient and modern times is my subject in this chapter, was 
intellectually one of the most important men that ever lived, both when he was wise and when he 
was unwise. Mathematics, in the sense of demonstrative deductive argument, begins with him, 
and in him is intimately connected with a peculiar form of mysticism. The influence of 
mathematics on philosophy, partly owing to him, has, ever since his time, been both profound and 
unfortunate. 

Let us begin with what little is kn own of his life. He was a native of the island of Samos, and 
flourished about 532 B.C. Some say he was the son of a substantial citizen named Mnesarchos, 
others that he was the son of the god Apollo; I leave the reader to take his choice between these 
alternatives. In his time Samos was ruled by the tyrant Polycrates, an old ruffian who became 
immensely rich, and had a vast navy. 

Samos was a commercial rival of Miletus; its traders went as far afield as Tartessus in Spain, 
which was famous for its mines. Polycrates became tyrant of Samos about 535 B.C., and reigned 
until 515 B.C. He was not much troubled by moral scruples; he got rid of his two brothers, who 
were at first associated with him in the tyranny, and he used his navy largely for piracy. He 
profited by the fact that Miletus had recently submitted to Persia. In order to obstruct any further 
westward expansion of the Persians, he allied himself with 


- 29 - 



Amasis, King of Egypt. But when Cambyses, King of Persia, devoted his full energies to the 
conquest of Egypt, Polycrates realized that he was likely to win, and changed sides. He sent a 
fleet, composed of his political enemies, to attack Egypt; but the crews mutinied and returned to 
Samos to attack him. He got the better of them, however, but fell at last by a treacherous appeal 
to his avarice. The Persian satrap at Sardes represented that he intended to rebel against the 
Great King, and would pay vast sums for the help of Polycrates, who went to the mainland for 
an interview, was captured and crucified. 

Polycrates was a patron of the arts, and beautified Samos with remarkable public works. 
Anacreon was his court poet. Pythagoras, however, disliked his government, and therefore left 
Samos. It is said, and is not improbable, that Pythagoras visited Egypt, and learnt much of his 
wisdom there; however that may be, it is certain that he ultimately established himself at 
Croton, in southern Italy. 

The Greek cities of southern Italy, like Samos and Miletus, were rich and prosperous; moreover 
they were not exposed to danger from the Persians. ^_The two greatest were Sybaris and Croton. 
Sybaris has remained proverbial for luxury; its population, in its greatest days, is said by 
Diodorus to have amounted to 300,000, though this is no doubt an exaggeration. Croton was 
about equal in size to Sybaris. Both cities lived by importing Ionian wares into Italy, partly for 
consumption in that country, partly for re-export from the western coast to Gaul and Spain. The 
various Greek cities of Italy fought each other fiercely; when Pythagoras arrived in Croton, it 
had just been defeated by Locri. Soon after his arrival, however, Croton was completely 
victorious in a war against Sybaris, which was utterly destroyed (510 B.C.). Sybaris had been 
closely linked in commerce with Miletus. Croton was famous for medicine; a certain 
Democedes of Croton became physician to Polycrates and then to Darius. 

At Croton Pythagoras founded a society of disciples, which for a time was influential in that 
city. But in the end the citizens turned against him, and he moved to Metapontion (also in 
southern Italy), where he died. He soon became a mythical figure, credited with miracles and 
magic powers, but he was also the founder of a school 


* The Greek cities of Sicily were in danger from the Carthaginians, but in Italy this danger 
was not felt to be imminent. 


of mathematicians. jyThus two opposing traditions disputed his memory, and the truth is hard to 
disentangle.Pythagoras is one of the most interesting and puzzling men in history. Not only are the 
traditions concerning him an almost inextricable mixture of truth and falsehood, but even in their 
barest and least disputable form they present us with a very curious psychology. He may be 
described, briefly, as a combination of Einstein and Mrs. Eddy. He founded a religion, of which 

the main tenets were the transmigration of souls —and the sinfulness of eating beans. His religion 
was embodied in a religious order, which, here and there, acquired control of the State and 
established a rule of the saints. But the unregenerate hankered after beans, and sooner or later 
rebelled. Some of the rules of the Pythagorean order were: 

1. To abstain from beans. 

2. Not to pick up what has fallen. 

3. Not to touch a white cock. 


4. 


Not to break bread. 


5. Not to step over a crossbar. 

6. Not to stir the fire with iron. 

7. Not to eat from a whole loaf. 

8. Not to pluck a garland. 

9. Not to sit on a quart measure. 

10. Not to eat the heart. 

11. Not to walk on highways. 

12. Not to let swallows share one's roof. 

13. When the pot is taken off the fire, not to leave the mark of it in the ashes, but to stir them 
together. 

14. Do not look in a mirror beside a light. 


* Aristotle says of him that he "first worked at mathematics and arithmetic, and afterwards, at 
one time, condescended to the wonder-working practised by Pherecydes." 

a Clown : What is the opinion of Pythagoras concerning wildfowl? 

£ 

Malvolio : That the soul of our grandam might haply inhabit a bird. 

Clown'. What thinkest thou of his opinion? 

Malvolio'. I think nobly of the soul, and no way approve his opinion. 

Clown: Fare thee well; remain thou still in darkness: thou shalt hold the opinion of Pythagoras 
ere I will allow of thy wits. 

(Twelfth Night) 

15. When you rise from the bedclothes, roll them together and smooth out the impress of the 
body. 


All these precepts belong to primitive tabu-conceptions. 

Cornford (From Religion to Philosophy) says that, in his opinion, "The School of Pythagoras 
represents the main current of that mystical tradition which we have set in contrast with the 
scientific tendency." He regards Parmenides, whom he calls "the discoverer of logic," as "an 
offshoot of Pythagoreanism, and Plato himself as finding in the Italian philosophy the chief source 
of his inspiration." Pythagoreanism, he says, was a movement of refonn in Orphism, and Orphism 
was a movement of refonn in the worship of Dionysus. The opposition of the rational and the 
mystical, which runs all through history, first appears, among the Greeks, as an opposition between 
the Olympic gods and those other less civilized gods who had more affinity with the primitive 
beliefs dealt with by anthropologists. In this division, Pythagoras was on the side of mysticism, 
though his mysticism was of a peculiarly intellectual sort. He attributed to himself a semi-divine 
character, and appears to have said: "There are men and gods, and beings like Pythagoras." All the 
systems that he inspired, Comford says, "tend to be otherworldly, putting all value in the unseen 
unity of God, and condemning the visible world as false and illusive, a turbid medium in which the 
rays of heavenly light are broken and obscured in mist and darkness." 

Dikaiarchos says that Pythagoras taught "first, that the soul is an immortal thing, and that it is 
transformed into other kinds of living things; further, that whatever comes into existence is born 
again in the revolutions of a certain cycle, nothing being absolutely new; and that all things that are 

bom with life in them ought to be treated as kindred." —It is said that Pythagoras, like Saint 
Francis, preached to animals. 

In the society that he founded, men and women were admitted on equal terms; property was held in 
common, and there was a common way of life. Even scientific and mathematical discoveries were 
deemed collective, and in a mystical sense due to Pythagoras even 


* Quoted from Bumet Early Greek Philosophy. 


Cornford, op. cit., p. 201. 


- 32 - 


after his death. Hippasos of Metapontion, who violated this rule, was shipwrecked as a result of 
divine wrath at his impiety. 

But what has all this to do with mathematics? It is connected by means of an ethic which 
praised the contemplative life. Bumet sums up this ethic as follows: 

"We are strangers in this world, and the body is the tomb of the soul, and yet we must not seek 
to escape by self-murder; for we are the chattels of God who is our herdsman, and without his 
command we have no right to make our escape. In this life, there are three kinds of men, just as 
there are three sorts of people who come to the Olympic Games. The lowest class is made up of 
those who come to buy and sell, the next above them are those who compete. Best of all, 
however, are those who come simply to look on. The greatest purification of all is, therefore, 
disinterested science, and it is the man who devotes himself to that, the true philosopher, who 
has most effectually released himself from the 'wheel of birth.’" 

The changes in the meanings of words are often very instructive. I spoke above about the word 
"orgy"; now I want to speak about the word "theory." This was originally an Orphic word, 
which Comford interprets as "passionate sympathetic contemplation." In this state, he says, 

"The spectator is identified with the suffering God, dies in his death, and rises again in his new 
birth." For Pythagoras, the "passionate sympathetic contemplation" was intellectual, and issued 
in mathematical knowledge. In this way, through Pythagoreanism, "theory" gradually acquired 
its modern meaning; but for all who were inspired by Pythagoras it retained an element of 
ecstatic revelation. To those who have reluctantly leamt a little mathematics in school this may 
seem strange; but to those who have experienced the intoxicating delight of sudden 
understanding that mathematics gives, from time to time, to those who love it, the Pythagorean 
view will seem completely natural even if untrue. It might seem that the empirical philosopher 
is the slave of his material, but that the pure mathematician, like the musician, is a free creator 
of his world of ordered beauty. 

It is interesting to observe, in Burnet's account of the Pythagorean 


* Early Greek Philosophy, p. 108. 


- 33 - 


ethic, the opposition to modem values. In connection with a football match, modern-minded men 
think the players grander than the mere spectators. Similarly as regards the State: they admire 
more the politicians who are the contestants in the game than those who are only onlookers. This 
change of values is connected with a change in the social system— the warrior, the gentleman, the 
plutocrat, and the dictator, each has his own standard of the good and the true. The gentleman has 
had a long innings in philosophical theory, because he is associated with the Greek genius, 
because the virtue of contemplation acquired theological endorsement, and because the ideal of 
disinterested truth dignified the academic life. The gentleman is to be defined as one of a society 
of equals who live on slave labour, or at any rate upon the labour of men whose inferiority is 
unquestioned. It should be observed that this definition includes the saint and the sage, insofar as 
these men's lives are contemplative rather than active. 

Modern definitions of truth, such as those of pragmatism and instrumentalism, which are practical 
rather than contemplative, are inspired by industrialism as opposed to aristocracy. 

Whatever may be thought of a social system which tolerates slavery, it is to gentlemen in the 
above sense that we owe pure mathematics. The contemplative ideal, since it led to the creation of 
pure mathematics, was the source of a useful activity; this increased its prestige, and gave it a 
success in theology, in ethics, and in philosophy, which it might not otherwise have enjoyed. 

So much by way of explanation of the two aspects of Pythagoras: as religious prophet and as pure 
mathematician. In both respects he was immeasurably influential, and the two were not so 
separate as they seem to a modern mind. 

Most sciences, at their inception, have been connected with some form of false belief, which gave 
them a fictitious value. Astronomy was connected with astrology, chemistry with alchemy. 
Mathematics was associated with a more refined type of error. Mathematical knowledge appeared 
to be certain, exact, and applicable to the real world; moreover it was obtained by mere thinking, 
without the need of observation. Consequently, it was thought to supply an ideal, from which 
every-day empirical knowledge fell short. It was supposed, on the basis of mathematics, that 
thought is superior to sense, intui- 


- 34 - 



tion to observation. If the world of sense does not fit mathematics, so much the worse for the 
world of sense. In various ways, methods of approaching nearer to the mathematician's ideal were 
sought, and the resulting suggestions were the source of much that was mistaken in metaphysics 
and theory of knowledge. This form of philosophy begins with Pythagoras. 

Pythagoras, as everyone knows, said that "all things are numbers." This statement, interpreted in a 
modem way, is logically nonsense, but what he meant was not exactly nonsense. He discovered 
the importance of numbers in music, and the connection which he established between music and 
arithmetic survives in the mathematical terms "harmonic mean" and "harmonic progression." He 
thought of numbers as shapes, as they appear on dice or playing cards. We still speak of squares 
and cubes of numbers, which are tenns that we owe to him. He also spoke of oblong numbers, 
triangular numbers, pyramidal numbers, and so on. These were the numbers of pebbles (or, as we 
should more naturally say, shot) required to make the shapes in question. He presumably thought 
of the world as atomic, and of bodies as built up of molecules composed of atoms arranged in 
various shapes. In this way he hoped to make arithmetic the fundamental study in physics as in 
aesthetics. 

The greatest discovery of Pythagoras, or of his immediate disciples, was the proposition about 
right-angled triangles, that the sum of the squares on the sides adjoining the right angle is equal to 
the square on the remaining side, the hypotenuse. The Egyptians had known that a triangle whose 
sides are 3, 4, 5 has a right angle, but apparently the Greeks were the first to observe that 32 + 42 
= 52, and, acting on this suggestion, to discover a proof of the general proposition. 

Unfortunately for Pythagoras, his theorem led at once to the discovery of incommensurables, 
which appeared to disprove his whole philosophy. In a right-angled isosceles triangle, the square 
on the hypotenuse is double of the square on either side. Let us suppose each side an inch long; 
then how long is the hypotenuse? Let us suppose its length is m/n inches. Then m2lrp = 2. If m 
and n have a common factor, divide it out; then either m or n must be odd. Now = 2rP, 
therefore M2 is even, therefore m is even; therefore n is odd. Suppose m = 2 p. Then 4 p^- = 2 rp, 
therefore rp = 2\P and therefore n is even, 


- 35 - 



contra hyp. Therefore no fraction m/n will measure the hypotenuse. The above proof is 
substantially that in Euclid, Book X. 

This argument proved that, whatever unit of length we may adopt, there are lengths which bear 
no exact numerical relation to the unit, in the sense that there are no two integers m, n, such that 
m times the length in question is n times the unit. This convinced the Greek mathematicians that 
geometry must be established independently of arithmetic. There are passages in Plato's 
dialogues which prove that the independent treatment of geometry was well under way in his 
day; it is perfected in Euclid. Euclid, in Book II, proves geometrically many things which we 

should naturally prove by algebra, such as ( a + b)^ = + lab + tP-. It was because of the 

difficulty about incommensurables that he considered this course necessary. The same applies 
to his treatment of proportion in Books V and VI. The whole system is logically delightful, and 
anticipates the rigour of nineteenthcentury mathematicians. So long as no adequate arithmetical 
theory of incommensurables existed, the method of Euclid was the best that was possible in 
geometry. When Descartes introduced co-ordinate geometry, thereby again making arithmetic 
supreme, he assumed the possibility of a solution of the problem of incommensurables, though 
in his day no such solution had been found. 

The influence of geometry upon philosophy and scientific method has been profound. 

Geometry, as established by the Greeks, starts with axioms which are (or are deemed to be) 
self-evident, and proceeds, by deductive reasoning, to arrive at theorems that are very far from 
self-evident. The axioms and theorems are held to be true of actual space, which is something 
given in experience. It thus appeared to be possible to discover things about the actual world by 
first noticing what is self-evident and then using deduction. This view influenced Plato and 
Kant, and most of the intermediate philosophers. When the Declaration of Independence says 
"we hold these truths to be selfevident," it is modelling itself on Euclid. The eighteenth-century 

doctrine of natural rights is a search for Euclidean axioms in politics. ^ The fonn of Newton 
Principia, in spite of its admittedly empirical 


* But not by Euclid. See Heath, Greek Mathematics . The above proof was probably known 
to Plato. 

a 

„ "Self-evident" was substituted by Franklin for Jefferson's "sacred and undeniable." 


- 36 - 


material, is entirely dominated by Euclid. Theology, in its exact scholastic forms, takes its style 
from the same source. Personal religion is derived from ecstasy, theology from mathematics; and 
both are to be found in Pythagoras. 

Mathematics is, I believe, the chief source of the belief in eternal and exact truth, as well as in a 
super-sensible intelligible world. Geometry deals with exact circles, but no sensible object is 
exactly circular; however carefully we may use our compasses, there will be some imperfections 
and irregularities. This suggests the view that all exact reasoning applies to ideal as opposed to 
sensible objects; it is natural to go further, and to argue that thought is nobler than sense, and the 
objects of thought more real than those of sense-perception. Mystical doctrines as to the relation 
of time to eternity are also reinforced by pure mathematics, for mathematical objects, such as 
numbers, if real at all, are eternal and not in time. Such eternal objects can be conceived as God’s 
thoughts. Hence Plato's doctrine that God is a geometer, and Sir James Jeans’ belief that He is 
addicted to arithmetic. Rationalistic as opposed to apocalyptic religion has been, ever since 
Pythagoras, and notably ever since Plato, very completely dominated by mathematics and 
mathematical method. 

The combination of mathematics and theology, which began with Pythagoras, characterized 
religious philosophy in Greece, in the Middle Ages, and in modern times down to Kant. Orphism 
before Pythagoras was analogous to Asiatic mystery religions. But in Plato, Saint Augustine, 
Thomas Aquinas, Descartes, Spinoza, and Kant there is an intimate blending of religion and 
reasoning, of moral aspiration with logical admiration of what is timeless, which comes from 
Pythagoras, and distinguishes the intellectualized theology of Europe from the more 
straightforward mysticism of Asia. It is only in quite recent times that it has been possible to say 
clearly where Pythagoras was wrong. I do not know of any other man who has been as influential 
as he was in the sphere of thought. I say this because what appears as Platonism is, when analysed, 
found to be in essence Pythagoreanism. The whole conception of an eternal world, revealed to the 
intellect but not to the senses, is derived from him. But for him, Christians would not have 
thought of Christ as the world; but for him, theologians would not have sought logical proofs of 
God and immortality. But in him all this is still implicit. How it became explicit will appear. 


- 37 - 



CHAPTER IV Heraclitus 


TWO opposite attitudes towards the Greeks are common at the present day. One, which was 
practically universal from the Renaissance until very recent times, views the Greeks with almost 
superstitious reverence, as the inventors of all that is best, and as men of superhuman genius 
whom the modems cannot hope to equal. The other attitude, inspired by the triumphs of science 
and by an optimistic belief in progress, considers the authority of the ancients an incubus, and 
maintains that most of their contributions to thought are now best forgotten. I cannot myself take 
either of these extreme views; each, I should say, is partly right and partly wrong. Before entering 
upon any detail, I shall try to say what sort of wisdom we can still derive from the study of Greek 
thought. 

As to the nature and structure of the world, various hypotheses are possible. Progress in 
metaphysics, so far as it has existed, has consisted in a gradual refinement of all these hypotheses, 
a development of their implications, and a refonnulation of each to meet the objections urged by 
adherents of rival hypotheses. To leam to conceive the universe according to each of these 
systems is an imaginative delight and an antidote to dogmatism. Moreover, even if no one of the 
hypotheses can be demonstrated, there is genuine knowledge in the discovery of what is involved 
in making each of them consistent with itself and with known facts. Now almost all the 
hypotheses that have dominated modern philosophy were first thought of by the Greeks; their 
imaginative inventiveness in abstract matters can hardly be too highly praised. What I shall have 
to say about the Greeks will be said mainly from this point of view; I shall regard them as giving 
birth to theories which have had an independent life and growth, and which, though at first 
somewhat infantile, have proved capable of surviving and developing throughout more than two 
thousand years. 


- 38 - 



The Greeks contributed, it is true, something else which proved of more pennanent value to 
abstract thought: they discovered mathematics and the art of deductive reasoning. Geometry, in 
particular, is a Greek invention, without which modern science would have been impossible. But 
in connection with mathematics the one-sidedness of the Greek genius appears: it reasoned 
deductively from what appeared self-evident, not inductively from what had been observed. Its 
amazing successes in the employment of this method misled not only the ancient world, but the 
greater part of the modern world also. It has only been very slowly that scientific method, which 
seeks to reach principles inductively from observation of particular facts, has replaced the 
Hellenic belief in deduction from luminous axioms derived from the mind of the philosopher. For 
this reason, apart from others, it is a mistake to treat the Greeks with superstitious reverence. 
Scientific method, though some few among them were the first men who had an inkling of it, is, 
on the whole, alien to their temper of mind, and the attempt to glorify them by belittling the 
intellectual progress of the last four centuries has a cramping effect upon modem thought. 

There is, however, a more general argument against reverence, whether for the Greeks or for 
anyone else. In studying a philosopher, the right attitude is neither reverence nor contempt, but 
first a kind of hypothetical sympathy, until it is possible to know what it feels like to believe in his 
theories, and only then a revival of the critical attitude, which should resemble, as far as possible, 
the state of mind of a person abandoning opinions which he has hitherto held. Contempt interferes 
with the first part of this process, and reverence with the second. Two things are to be 
remembered: that a man whose opinions and theories are worth studying may be presumed to have 
had some intelligence, but that no man is likely to have arrived at complete and final truth on any 
subject whatever. When an intelligent man expresses a view which seems to us obviously absurd, 
we should not attempt to prove that it is somehow true, but we should try to understand how it 
ever came to seem true. This exercise of historical and psychological imagination at once enlarges 
the scope of our thinking, and helps us to realize how foolish many of our own cherished 
prejudices will seem to an age which has a different temper of mind. 

Between Pythagoras and Heraclitus, with whom we shall be con- 


- 39 - 



cerned in this chapter, there was another philosopher, of less importance, namely Xenophanes. 
His date is uncertain, and is mainly determined by the fact that he alludes to Pythagoras and 
Heraclitus alludes to him. He was an Ionian by birth, but lived most of his life in southern Italy. 
He believed all things to be made out of earth and water. As regards the gods he was a very 
emphatic free thinker. "Homer and Hesiod have ascribed to the gods all things that are a shame 
and a disgrace among mortals, stealings and adulteries and deceivings of one another. . . . 
Mortals deem that gods are begotten as they are, and have clothes like theirs, and voice and 
form . . . yes, and if oxen and horses or lions had hands, and could paint with their hands, and 
produce works of art as men do, horses would paint the forms of gods like horses, and oxen like 
oxen, and make their bodies in the image of their several kinds. . . . The Ethiopians make their 
gods black and snub-nosed; the Thracians say theirs have blue eyes and red hair." He believed 
in one God, unlike men in fonn and thought, who "without toil swayeth all things by the force 
of his mind." Xenophanes made fun of the Pythagorean doctrine of transmigration: "Once, they 
say, he ( Pythagoras) was passing by when a dog was being ill-treated. ’Stop,' he said, ’don’t hit 
it! It is the soul of a friend! I knew it when I heard its voice.’" He believed it impossible to 
ascertain the truth in matters of theology. "The certain truth there is no man who knows, nor 
ever shall be, about the gods and all the things whereof I speak. Yea, even if a man should 
chance to say something utterly right, still he himself knows it not— there is nowhere anything 
but guessing." 

Xenophanes has his place in the succession of rationalists who were opposed to the mystical 
tendencies of Pythagoras and others, but as an independent thinker he is not in the first ra nk . 

The doctrine of Pythagoras, as we saw, is very difficult to disentangle from that of his disciples, 
and although Pythagoras himself is very early, the influence of his school is mainly subsequent 
to that of various other philosophers. The first of these to invent a theory which is still 
influential was Heraclitus, who flourished about 500 B.C. Of his life very little is known, 
except that he was an aristocratic citizen of Ephesus. He was chiefly famous in antiquity for his 
doctrine 


* Quoted from Edwyn Bevan, Stoics and Sceptics, Oxford, 1913, p. 121. 


- 40 - 


that everything is in a state of flux, but this, as we shall see, is only one aspect of his 
metaphysics. 

Heraclitus, though an Ionian, was not in the scientific tradition of the Milesians. f_He was a 
mystic, but of a peculiar kind. He regarded fire as the fundamental substance; everything, like 
flame in a fire, is bom by the death of something else. "Mortals are immortals, and immortals 
are mortals, the one living the other's death and dying the other's life." There is unity in the 
world, but it is a unity formed by the combination of opposites. "All things come out of the one, 
and the one out of all things"; but the many have less reality than the one, which is God. 

From what survives of his writings he does not appear as an amiable character. He was much 
addicted to contempt, and was the reverse of a democrat. Concerning his fellow-citizens he 
says: "The Ephesians would do well to hang themselves, every grown man of them, and leave 
the city to beardless lads; for they have cast out Hermodorus, the best man among them, saying: 
'We will have none who is best among us; if there be any such, let him be so elsewhere and 
among others.'" He speaks ill of all his eminent predecessors, with a single exception. "Homer 
should be turned out of the lists and whipped." "Of all whose discourses I have heard, there is 
not one who attains to understanding that wisdom is apart from all." "The learning of many 
things teacheth not understanding, else would it have taught Hesiod and Pythagoras, and again 
Xenophanes and Hecataeus." "Pythagoras . . . claimed for his own wisdom what was but a 
knowledge of many things and an art of mischief." The one exception to his condemnations is 
Teutamus, who is signalled out as "of more account than the rest." When we inquire the reason 
for this praise, we find that Teutamus said "most men are bad." 

His contempt for ma nk ind leads him to think that only force will compel them to act for their 
own good. He says: "Every beast is driven to the pasture with blows"; and again: "Asses would 
rather have straw than gold." 

As might be expected, Heraclitus believes in war. "War," he says, "is the father of all and the 
king of all; and some he has made gods and some men, some bond and some free." Again: 
"Homer was 


* Cornford, op. cit. (p. 184), emphasises this, I thi nk rightly. Heraclitus is often 
misunderstood through being assimilated to other Ionians. 


- 41 - 


wrong in saying: ’Would that strife might perish from among gods and men!’ He did not see that 
he was praying for the destruction of the universe; for, if his prayer were heard, all things would 
pass away." And yet again: "We must know that war is common to all and strife is justice, and that 
all things come into being and pass away through strife." 

His ethic is a kind of proud asceticism, very similar to Nietzsche's. He regards the soul as a 
mixture of fire and water, the fire being noble and the water ignoble. The soul that has most fire 
he calls "dry." "The dry soul is the wisest and best." "It is pleasure to souls to become moist." "A 
man, when he gets drunk, is led by a beardless lad, tripping, knowing not where he steps, having 
his soul moist." "It is death to souls to become water." "It is hard to fight with one's heart's desire. 
Whatever it wishes to get, it purchases at the cost of soul." "It is not good for men to get all that 
they wish to get." One may say that Heraclitus values power obtained through self-mastery, and 
despises the passions that distract men from their central ambitions. 

The attitude of Heraclitus to the religions of his time, at any rate the Bacchic religion, is largely 
hostile, but not with the hostility of a scientific rationalist. He has his own religion, and in part 
interprets current theology to fit his doctrine, in part rejects it with considerable scorn. He has 
been called Bacchic (by Cornford), and regarded as an interpreter of the mysteries (by Pfleiderer). 

I do not think the relevant fragments bear out this view. He says, for example: "The mysteries 
practised among men are unholy mysteries." This suggests that he had in mind possible mysteries 
that would not be "unholy," but would be quite different from those that existed. He would have 
been a religious reformer, if he had not been too scornful of the vulgar to engage in propaganda. 

The following are all the extant sayings of Heraclitus that bear on his attitude to the theology of 
his day. 

The Lord whose is the oracle at Delphi neither utters nor hides his meaning, but shows it by a 
sign. 

And the Sibyl, with raving lips uttering things mirthless, unbedizened, and unperfumed, reaches 
over a thousand years with her voice, thanks to the god in her. 

Souls smell in Hades. 


- 42 - 



Greater deaths win greater portions. (Those who die then become gods.) 

Night-walkers, magicians, priests of Bacchus and priestesses of the wine-vat, mystery-mongers. 
The mysteries practised among men are unholy mysteries. 

And they pray to these images, as if one were to talk with a man’s house, knowing not what gods 
or heroes are. 

For if it were not to Dionysus that they made a procession and sang the shameful phallic hymn, 
they would be acting most shamelessly. But Hades is the same as Dionysus in whose honour they 
go mad and keep the feast of the wine-vat. 

They vainly purify themselves by defiling themselves with blood, just as if one who had stepped 
into the mud were to wash his feet in mud. Any man who marked him doing this, would deem 
him mad. 

Heraclitus believed fire to be the primordial element, out of which everything else had arisen. 
Thales, the reader will remember, thought everything was made of water; Anaximenes thought air 
was the primitive element; Heraclitus preferred fire. At last Empedocles suggested a statesmanlike 
compromise by allowing four elements, earth, air, fire and water. The chemistry of the ancients 
stopped dead at this point. No further progress was made in this science until the Mohammedan 
alchemists embarked upon their search for the philosopher’s stone, the elixir of life, and a method 
of transmuting base metals into gold. 

The metaphysics of Heraclitus are sufficiently dynamic to satisfy the most hustling of moderns: 

"This world, which is the same for all, no one of gods or men has made; but it was ever, is now, 
and ever shall be an ever-living Fire, with measures kindling and measures going out." 

"The transformations of Fire are, first of all, sea; and half of the sea is earth, half whirlwind." 

In such a world, perpetual change was to be expected, and perpetual change was what Heraclitus 
believed in. 

He had, however, another doctrine on which he set even more store than on the perpetual flux; this 
was the doctrine of the mingling of opposites. "Men do not know," he says, "how what is at 
variance agrees with itself. It is an attunement of opposite tensions, like that of the bow and the 
lyre." His belief in strife is connected with this 


- 43 - 



theory, for in strife opposites combine to produce a motion which is a harmony. There is a unity in 
the world, but it is a unity resulting from diversity: 

"Couples are things whole and things not whole, what is drawn together and what is drawn 
asunder, the harmonious and the discordant. The one is made up of all things, and all things issue 
from the one." 

Sometimes he speaks as if the unity were more fundamental than the diversity: 

"Good and ill are one." 

"To God all things are fair and good and right, but men hold some things wrong and some right." 
"The way up and the way down is one and the same." 

"God is day and night, winter and summer, war and peace, surfeit and hunger; but he takes various 
shapes, just as fire, when it is mingled with spices, is named according to the savour of each." 

Nevertheless, there would be no unity if there were not opposites to combine: "it is the opposite 
which is good for us." 

This doctrine contains the genn of Hegel's philosophy, which proceeds by a synthesising of 
opposites. 

The metaphysics of Heraclitus, like that of Anaximander, is dominated by a conception of cosmic 
justice, which prevents the strife of opposites from ever issuing in the complete victory of either. 

"All things are an exchange for Fire, and Fire for all things, even as wares for gold and gold for 
wares." 

"Fire lives the death of air, and air lives the death of fire; water lives the death of earth, earth that 
of water." 

"The sun will not overstep his measures; if he does, the Erinys, the handmaids of Justice, will find 
him out." 

"We must kn ow that war is common to all, and strife is justice." 

Heraclitus repeatedly speaks of "God" as distinct from "the gods." "The way of man has no 
wisdom, but that of God has. . . . Man is called a baby by God, even as a child by a man. . . . The 
wisest man is an ape compared to God, just as the most beautiful ape is ugly compared to man." 

God, no doubt, is the embodiment of cosmic justice. 

The doctrine that everything is in a state of flux is the most famous of the opinions of Heraclitus, 
and the one most emphasised by his disciples, as described in Plato Theaetetus. 


- 44 - 



"You cannot step twice into the same river; for fresh waters are ever flowing in upon you." 

"The sun is new every day." 

His belief in universal change is commonly supposed to have been expressed in the phrase "all 
things are flowing," but this is probably apocryphal, like Washington "Father, I cannot tell a 
lie" and Wellington's "Up Guards and at 'em. " His works, like those of all the philosophers 
before Plato, are only known through quotations, largely made by Plato or Aristotle for the sake 
of refutation. When one thinks what would become of any modem philosopher if he were only 
known through the polemics of his rivals, one can see how admirable the pre-Socratics must 
have been, since even through the mist of malice spread by their enemies they still appear great. 
However this may be, Plato and Aristotle agree that Heraclitus taught that "nothing ever is, 
everything is becoming" ( Plato), and that "nothing steadfastly is" ( Aristotle). 

I shall return to the consideration of this doctrine in connection with Plato, who is much 
concerned to refute it. For the present, I shall not investigate what philosophy has to say about 
it, but only what the poets have felt and the men of science have taught. 

The search for something permanent is one of the deepest of the instincts leading men to 
philosophy. It is derived, no doubt, from love of home and desire for a refuge from danger; we 
find, accordingly, that it is most passionate in those whose lives are most exposed to 
catastrophe. Religion seeks permanence in two forms, God and immortality. In God is no 
variableness neither shadow of turning; the life after death is eternal and unchanging. The 
cheerfulness of the nineteenth century turned men against these static conceptions, and modern 
liberal theology believes that there is progress in heaven and evolution in the Godhead. But 
even in this conception there is something permanent, namely progress itself and its immanent 
goal. And a dose of disaster is likely to bring men's hopes back to their older super-terrestrial 
forms: if life on earth is despaired of, it is only in heaven that peace can be sought. 

The poets have lamented the power of Time to sweep away every object of their love. 


* But cf. "We step and do not step into the same rivers; we are, and are not." 


- 45 - 


Tme doth transfix the flourish set on youth. And delves the parallels in beauty's brow, Feeds on 
the rarities of nature’s truth, And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow. 

They generally add that their own verses are indestructible: 

And yet to times in hope my verse shall stand, Praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand. 

But this is only a conventional literary conceit. 

Philosophically inclined mystics, unable to deny that whatever is in time is transitory, have 
invented a conception of eternity as not persistence through endless time, but existence outside the 
whole temporal process. Eternal life, according to some theologians, for example, Dean Inge, does 
not mean existence throughout every moment of future time, but a mode of being wholly 
independent of time, in which there is no before and after, and therefore no logical possibility of 
change. This view has been poetically expressed by Vaughan: 

I saw Eternity the other night, Like a great ring of pure and endless light, All calm, as it was 
bright; And round beneath it, Time in hours, days, years, Driven by the spheres Like a vast 
shadow moved; in which the world And all her train were hurled. 

Several of the most famous systems of philosophy have tried to state this conception in sober 
prose, as expressing what reason, patiently pursued, will ultimately compel us to believe. 

Heraclitus himself, for all his belief in change, allowed something everlasting. The conception of 
eternity (as opposed to endless duration), which comes from Pannenides, is not to be found in 
Heraclitus, but in his philosophy the central fire never dies: the world "was ever, is now, and ever 
shall be, an ever-living Fire." But fire is something continually changing, and its permanence is 
rather that of a process than that of a substance— though this view should not be attributed to 
Heraclitus. 

Science, like philosophy, has sought to escape from the doctrine of perpetual flux by finding some 
pennanent substratum amid chang- 


- 46 - 



ing phenomena. Chemistry seemed to satisfy this desire. It was found that fire, which appears to 
destroy, only transmutes: elements are recombined, but each atom that existed before combustion 
still exists when the process is completed. Accordingly it was supposed that atoms are 
indestructible, and that all change in the physical world consists merely in re-arrangement of 
persistent elements. This view prevailed until the discovery of radio-activity, when it was found 
that atoms could disintegrate. 

Nothing daunted, the physicists invented new and smaller units, called electrons and protons, out 
of which atoms were composed; and these units were supposed, for a few years, to have the 
indestructibility formerly attributed to atoms. Unfortunately it seemed that protons and electrons 
could meet and explode, forming, not new matter, but a wave of energy spreading through the 
universe with the velocity of light. Energy had to replace matter as what is permanent. But energy, 
unlike matter, is not a refinement of the common-sense notion of a "thing"; it is merely a 
characteristic of physical processes. It might be fancifully identified with the Heraclitean Fire, but 
it is the burning, not what bums. "What bums" has disappeared from modern physics. 

Passing from the small to the large, astronomy no longer allows us to regard the heavenly bodies 
as everlasting. The planets came out of the sun, and the sun came out of a nebula. It has lasted 
some time, and will last some time longer; but sooner or later— probably in about a million million 
years— it will explode, destroying all the planets, and reverting to the condition of a widely- 
diffused gas. So at least the astronomers say; perhaps as the fatal day draws nearer they will find 
some mistake in their calculations. 

The doctrine of the perpetual flux, as taught by Heraclitus, is painful, and science, as we have 
seen, can do nothing to refute it. One of the main ambitions of philosophers has been to revive 
hopes that science seemed to have killed. Philosophers, accordingly, have sought, with great 
persistence, for something not subject to the empire of Time. This search begins with Parmenides. 


- 47 - 



CHAPTER V Parmenides 


THE Greeks were not addicted to moderation, either in their theories or in their practice. 
Heraclitus maintained that everything changes; Parmenides retorted that nothing changes. 
Parmenides was a native of Elea, in the south of Italy, and flourished in the first half of the fifth 
century B.C. According to Plato, Socrates in his youth (say about the year 450 B.C.) had an 
interview with Parmenides, then an old man, and learnt much from him. Whether or not this 
interview is historical, we may at least infer, what is otherwise evident, that Plato himself was 
influenced by the doctrines of Parmenides. The south Italian and Sicilian philosophers were more 
inclined to mysticism and religion than those of Ionia, who were on the whole scientific and 
sceptical in their tendencies. But mathematics, under the influence of Pythagoras, flourished more 
in Magna Grecia than in Ionia; mathematics at that time, however, was entangled with mysticism. 
Parmenides was influenced by Pythagoras, but the extent of this influence is conjectural. What 
makes Pannenides historically important is that he invented a fonn of metaphysical argument that, 
in one form or another, is to be found in most subsequent metaphysicians down to and including 
Hegel. He is often said to have invented logic, but what he really invented was metaphysics based 
on logic. 

The doctrine of Pannenides was set forth in a poem On Nature. He considered the senses 
deceptive, and condemned the multitude of sensible things as mere illusion. The only true being is 
"the One," which is infinite and indivisible. It is not, as in Heraclitus, a union of opposites, since 
there are no opposites. He apparently thought, for instance, that "cold" means only "not hot," and 
"dark" means only "not light." "The One" is not conceived by Parmenides as we conceive God; he 
seems to think of it as material and extended, for he 

- 48 - 



speaks of it as a sphere. But it cannot be divided, because the whole of it is present everywhere. 

Parmenides divides his teaching into two parts, called respectively "the way of truth" and "the 
way of opinion." We need not concern ourselves with the latter. What he says about the way of 
truth, so far as it has survived, is, in its essential points, as follows: 

"Thou canst not kn ow what is not— that is impossible— nor utter it; for it is the same thing that 
can be thought and that can be." 

"How, then, can what is be going to be in the future? Or how could it come into being? If it 
came into being, it is not; nor is it if it is going to be in the future. Thus is becoming 
extinguished and passing away not to be heard of. 

"The thing that can be thought and that for the sake of which the thought exists is the same; for 
you cannot find thought without something that is, as to which it is uttered." 

The essence of this argument is: When you think, you think of something; when you use a 
name, it must be the name of something. Therefore both thought and language require objects 
outside themselves. And since you can think of a thing or speak of it at one time as well as at 
another, whatever can be thought of or spoken of must exist at all times. Consequently there can 
be no change, since change consists in things coming into being or ceasing to be. 

This is the first example in philosophy of an argument from thought and language to the world 
at large. It cannot of course be accepted as valid, but it is worth while to see what element of 
truth it contains. 

We can put the argument in this way: if language is not just nonsense, words must mean 
something, and in general they must not mean just other words, but something that is there 
whether we talk of it or not. Suppose, for example, that you talk of George Washington. Unless 
there were a historical person who had that name, the name (it would seem) would be 
meaningless, and sentences containing the name would be nonsense. Parmenides maintains that 
not only must George Washington have existed in the past, but in some sense he must still exist, 
since we can still use his name significantly. This seems obviously untrue, but how are we to 
get round the argument? 


* Burnet's note: "The meaning, I think, is this. . . . There can be no thought corresponding to 
a name that is not the name of something real." 


- 49 - 


Let us take an imaginary person, say Hamlet. Consider the statement "Hamlet was Prince of 
Denmark." In some sense this is true, but not in the plain historical sense. The true statement is 
"Shakespeare says that Hamlet was Prince of Denmark," or, more explicitly, "Shakespeare says 
there was a Prince of Denmark called ' Hamlet.'" Here there is no longer anything imaginary. 
Shakespeare and Denmark and the noise "Hamlet" are all real, but the noise "Hamlet" is not really 
a name, since nobody is really called "Hamlet." If you say "'Hamlet' is the name of an imaginary 
person," that is not strictly correct; you ought to say "It is imagined that 'Hamlet' is the name of a 
real person." 

Hamlet is an imagined individual; unicorns are an imagined species. Some sentences in which the 
word "unicorn" occurs are true, and some are false, but in each case not directly. Consider "a 
unicorn has one horn" and "a cow has two horns." To prove the latter, you have to look at a cow; 
it is not enough to say that in some book cows are said to have two horns. But the evidence that 
unicorns have one horn is only to be found in books, and in fact the correct statement is: "Certain 
books assert that there are animals with one hom called 'unicorns.'" All statements about unicorns 
are really about the word "unicorn," just as all statements about Hamlet are really about the word 
"Hamlet." 

But it is obvious that, in most cases, we are not speaking of words, but of what the words mean. 
And this brings us back to the argument of Parmenides, that if a word can be used significantly it 
must mean something, not nothing, and therefore what the word means must in some sense exist. 

What, then, are we to say about George Washington? It seems we have only two alternatives: one 
is to say that he still exists; the other is to say that, when we use the words "George Washington," 
we are not really speaking of the man who bore that name. Either seems a paradox, but the latter is 
less of a paradox, and I shall try to show a sense in which it is true. 

Parmenides assumes that words have a constant meaning; this is really the basis of his argument, 
which he supposes unquestionable. But although the dictionary or the encyclopaedia gives what 
may be called the official and socially sanctioned meaning of a word, no two 


- 50 - 



people who use the same word have just the same thought in their minds. 

George Washington himself could use his name and the word "I" as synonyms. He could perceive 
his own thoughts and the movements of his body, and could therefore use his name with a fuller 
meaning than was possible for any one else. His friends, when in his presence, could perceive the 
movements of his body, and could divine his thoughts; to them, the name "George Washington" 
still denoted something concrete in their own experience. After his death they had to substitute 
memories for perceptions, which involved a change in the mental processes taking place when 
they used his name. For us, who never knew him, the mental processes are again different. We 
may think of his picture, and say to ourselves "yes, that man." We may think "the first President of 
the United States." If we are very ignorant, he may be to us merely "The man who was called ’ 
George Washington.'" Whatever the name suggests to us, it must be not the man himself, since we 
never knew him, but something now present to sense or memory or thought. This shows the 
fallacy of the argument of Parmenides. 

This perpetual change in the meanings of words is concealed by the fact that, in general, the 
change makes no difference to the truth or falsehood of the propositions in which the words occur. 
If you take any true sentence in which the name "George Washington" occurs, it will, as a rule, 
remain true if you substitute the phrase "the first President of the United States." There are 
exceptions to this rule. Before Washington's election, a man might say "I hope George 
Washington will be the first President of the United States," but he would not say "I hope the first 
President of the United States will be the first President of the United States" unless he had an 
unusual passion for the law of identity. But it is easy to make a rule for excluding these 
exceptional cases, and in those that remain you may substitute for "George Washington" any 
descriptive phrase that applies to him alone. And it is only by means of such phrases that we kn ow 
what we know about him. 

Parmenides contends that, since we can now know what is commonly regarded as past, it cannot 
really be past, but must, in some sense, exist now. Hence he infers that there is no such thing as 
change. What we have been saying about George Washington meets 


- 51 - 



this argument. It may be said, in a sense, that we have no knowledge of the past. When you 
recollect, the recollection occurs now, and is not identical with the event recollected. But the 
recollection affords a description of the past event, and for most practical purposes it is 
unnecessary to distinguish between the description and what it describes. 

This whole argument shows how easy it is to draw metaphysical conclusions from language, and 
how the only way to avoid fallacious arguments of this kind is to push the logical and 
psychological study of language further than has been done by most metaphysicians. 

I think, however, that, if Parmenides could return from the dead and read what I have been saying, 
he would regard it as very superficial. "How do you know," he would ask, "that your statements 
about George Washington refer to a past time? By your own account, the direct reference is to 
things now present; your recollections, for instance, happen now, not at the time that you think 
you recollect. If memory is to be accepted as a source of knowledge, the past must be before the 
mind now, and must therefore in some sense still exist." 

I will not attempt to meet this argument now; it requires a discussion of memory, which is a 
difficult subject. I have put the argument here to remind the reader that philosophical theories, if 
they are important, can generally be revived in a new form after being refuted as originally stated. 
Refutations are seldom final; in most cases, they are only a prelude to further refinements. 

What subsequent philosophy, down to quite modem times, accepted from Parmenides, was not the 
impossibility of all change, which was too violent a paradox, but the indestructibility of substance. 
The word "substance" did not occur in his immediate successors, but the concept is already 
present in their speculations. A substance was supposed to be the persistent subject of varying 
predicates. As such it became, and remained for more than two thousand years, one of the 
fundamental concepts of philosophy, psychology, physics, and theology. I shall have much to say 
about it at a later stage. For the present, I am merely concerned to note that it was introduced as a 
way of doing justice to the arguments of Parmenides without denying obvious facts. 


- 52 - 



CHAPTER VI Empedocles 


THE mixture of philosopher, prophet, man of science, and charlatan, which we found already in 
Pythagoras, was exemplified very completely in Empedocles, who flourished about 440 B.C., and 
was thus a younger contemporary of Parmenides, though his doctrine had in some ways more 
affinity with that of Heraclitus. He was a citizen of Acragas, on the south coast of Sicily; he was a 
democratic politician, who at the same time claimed to be a god. In most Greek cities, and 
especially in those of Sicily, there was a constant conflict between democracy and tyranny; the 
leaders of whichever party was at the moment defeated were executed or exiled. Those who were 
exiled seldom scrupled to enter into negotiations with the enemies of Greece— Persia in the East, 
Carthage in the West. Empedocles, in due course, was banished, but he appears, after his 
banishment, to have preferred the career of a sage to that of an intriguing refugee. It seems 
probable that in youth he was more or less Orphic; that before his exile he combined politics and 
science; and that it was only in later life, as an exile, that he became a prophet. 

Legend had much to say about Empedocles. He was supposed to have worked miracles, or what 
seemed such, sometimes by magic, sometimes by means of his scientific knowledge. He could 
control the winds, we are told; he restored to life a woman who had seemed dead for thirty days; 
finally, it is said, he died by leaping into the crater of Etna to prove that he was a god. In the words 
of the poet: 


Great Empedocles, that ardent soul Leapt into Etna, and was roasted whole. 

Matthew Arnold wrote a poem on this subject, but, although one of his worst, it does not contain 
the above couplet. 

Like Parmenides, Empedocles wrote in verse. Lucretius, who was 


- 53 - 



influenced by him, praised him highly as a poet, but on this subject opinions were divided. Since 
only fragments of his writings have survived, his poetic merit must remain in doubt. 

It is necessary to deal separately with his science and his religion, as they are not consistent with 
each other. I shall consider first his science, then his philosophy, and finally his religion. 

His most important contribution to science was his discovery of air as a separate substance. This 
he proved by the observation that when a bucket or any similar vessel is put upside down into 
water, the water does not enter into the bucket. He says: 

"When a girl, playing with a water-clock of shining brass, puts the orifice of the pipe upon her 
comely hand, and dips the waterclock into the yielding mass of silvery water, the stream does not 
then flow into the vessel, but the bulk of the air inside, pressing upon the close-packed 
perforations, keeps it out till she uncovers the compressed stream; but then air escapes and an 
equal volume of water runs in." 

This passage occurs in an explanation of respiration. 

He also discovered at least one example of centrifugal force: that if a cup of water is whirled 
round at the end of a string, the water does not come out. 

He knew that there is sex in plants, and he had a theory (somewhat fantastic, it must be admitted) 
of evolution and the survival of the fittest. Originally, "countless tribes of mortal creatures were 
scattered abroad endowed with all manner of forms, a wonder to behold." There were heads 
without necks, anns without shoulders, eyes without foreheads, solitary limbs seeking for union. 
These things joined together as each might chance; there were shambling creatures with countless 
hands, creatures with faces and breasts looking in different directions, creatures with the bodies of 
oxen and the faces of men, and others with the faces of oxen and the bodies of men. There were 
hennaphrodites combining the natures of men and women, but sterile. In the end, only certain 
forms survived. 

As regards astronomy: he knew that the moon shines by reflected light, and thought that this is 
also true of the sun; he said that light takes time to travel, but so little time that we cannot observe 
it; he knew that solar eclipses are caused by the interposition of the moon, a fact which he seems 
to have leamt from Anaxagoras. 


- 54 - 



He was the founder of the Italian school of medicine, and the medical school which sprang from 
him influenced both Plato and Aristotle. According to Bumet (p. 234), it affected the whole 
tendency of scientific and philosophical thinking. 

All this shows the scientific vigour of his time, which was not equalled in the later ages of Greece. 

I come now to his cosmology. It was he, as already mentioned, who established earth, air, fire, and 
water as the four elements (though the word "element" was not used by him). Each of these was 
everlasting, but they could be mixed in different proportions, and thus produce the changing 
complex substances that we find in the world. They were combined by Love and separated by 
Strife. Love and Strife were, for Empedocles, primitive substances on a level with earth, air, fire, 
and water. There were periods when Love was in the ascendant, and others when Strife was the 
stronger. There had been a golden age when Love was completely victorious. In that age, men 
worshipped only the Cyprian Aphrodite. The changes in the world are not governed by any 
purpose, but only by Chance and Necessity. There is a cycle: when the elements have been 
thoroughly mixed by Love, Strife gradually sorts them out again; when Strife has separated them, 
Love gradually reunites them. Thus every compound substance is temporary; only the elements, 
together with Love and Strife, are everlasting. 

There is a similarity to Heraclitus, but a softening, since it is not Strife alone, but Strife and Love 
together, that produce change. Plato couples Heraclitus and Empedocles in the Sophist (242): 

There are Ionian, and in more recent time Sicilian, muses, who have arrived at the conclusion that 
to unite the two principles (of the One and the Many), is safer, and to say that being is one and 
many, and that these are held together by enmity and friendship, ever parting, ever meeting, as the 
severer Muses assert, while the gentler ones do not insist on the perpetual strife and peace, but 
admit a relaxation and alternation of them; peace and unity sometimes prevailing under the sway 
of Aphrodite, and then again plurality and war, by reason of a principle of strife. 

Empedocles held that the material world is a sphere; that in the Golden Age Strife was outside and 
Love inside; then, gradually, Strife 


- 55 - 



entered and Love was expelled, until, at the worst, Strife will be wholly within and Love wholly 
without the sphere. Then— though for what reason is not clear— an opposite movement begins, until 
the Golden Age returns, but not for ever. The whole cycle is then repeated. One might have 
supposed that either extreme could be stable, but that is not the view of Empedocles. He wished to 
explain motion while taking account of the arguments of Pannenides, and he had no wish to 
arrive, at any stage, at an unchanging universe. 

The views of Empedocles on religion are, in the main, Pythagorean. In a fragment which, in all 
likelihood, refers to Pythagoras, he says: "There was among them a man of rare knowledge, most 
skilled in all manner of wise works, a man who had won the utmost wealth of wisdom; for 
whensoever he strained with all his mind, he easily saw everything of all the things that are, in ten, 
yea twenty lifetimes of men." In the Golden Age, as already mentioned, men worshipped only 
Aphrodite, "and the altar did not reek with pure bull's blood, but this was held in the greatest 
abomination among men, to eat the goodly limbs after tearing out the life." 

At one time he speaks of himself exuberantly as a god: 

Friends, that inhabit the great city looking down on the yellow rock of Acragas, up by the citadel, 
busy in goodly works, harbour of honour for the stranger, men unskilled in meanness, all hail. I go 
about among you an immortal god, no mortal now, honoured among all as is meet, crowned with 
fillets and flowery garlands. Straightway, whenever I enter with these in my train, both men and 
women, into the flourishing towns, is reverence done me; they go after me in countless throngs, 
asking of me what is the way to gain; some desiring oracles, while some, who for many a weary 
day have been pierced by the grievous pangs of all manner of sickness, beg to hear from me the 
word of healing. . . . But why do I harp on these things, as if it were any great matter that I should 
surpass mortal, perishable men?" 

At another time he feels himself a great sinner, undergoing expiation for his impiety: 

There is an oracle of Necessity, an ancient ordinance of the gods, eternal and sealed fast by broad 
oaths, that whenever one of the daemons, whose portion is length of days, has sinfully polluted his 
hands with blood, or followed strife and foresworn himself, he 


- 56 - 



must wander thrice ten thousand years from the abodes of the blessed, being born throughout 
the time in all manners of mortal forms, changing one toilsome path of life for another. For the 
mighty Air drives him into the Sea, and the Sea spews him forth upon the dry Earth; Earth 
tosses him into the beams of the blazing Sun, and he flings him back to the eddies of Air. One 
takes him from the other, and all reject him. One of these I now am, an exile and a wanderer 
from the gods, for that I put my trust in insensate strife. 

What his sin had been, we do not know; perhaps nothing that we should think very grievous. 

For he says: 

"Ah, woe is me that the pitiless day of death did not destroy me ere ever I wrought evil deeds of 
devouring with my lips! . . . 

"Abstain wholly from laurel leaves . . . 

"Wretches, utter wretches, keep your hands from beans!" 

So perhaps he had done nothing worse than munching laurel leaves or guzzling beans. 

The most famous passage in Plato, in which he compares this world to a cave, in which we see 
only shadows of the realities in the bright world above, is anticipated by Empedocles; its origin 
is in the teaching of the Orphics. 

There are some— presumably those who abstain from sin through many incarnations— who at last 
achieve immortal bliss in the company of the gods: 

But, at the last, they ^appear among mortal men as prophets, song-writers, physicians, and 
princes; and thence they rise up as gods exalted in honour, sharing the hearth of the other gods 
and the same table, free from human woes, safe from destiny, and incapable of hurt. 

In all this, it would seem, there is very little that was not already contained in the teaching of 
Orphism and Pythagoreanism. 

The originality of Empedocles, outside science, consists in the doctrine of the four elements and 
in the use of the two principles of Love and Strife to explain change. 

He rejected monism, and regarded the course of nature as regulated 


* It does not appear who "they" are, but one may assume that they are those who have 
preserved purity. 


- 57 - 


by chance and necessity rather than by purpose. In these respects his philosophy was more 
scientific than those of Parmenides, Plato, and Aristotle. In other respects, it is true, he acquiesced 
in current superstitions; but in this he was no worse than many more recent men of science. 

CHAPTER VII Athens in Relation to Culture 

THE greatness of Athens begins at the time of the two Persian wars ( 490 B.C. and 480-79 B.C.). 
Before that time, Ionia and Magna Graecia (the Greek cities of south Italy and Sicily) produced 
the great men. The victory of Athens against the Persian king Darius at Marathon ( 490), and of 
the combined Greek fleets against his son and successor Xerxes ( 480) under Athenian leadership, 
gave Athens great prestige. The Ionians in the islands and on part of the mainland of Asia Minor 
had rebelled against Persia, and their liberation was effected by Athens after the Persians had been 
driven from the mainland of Greece. In this operation the Spartans, who cared only about their 
own territory, took no part. Thus Athens became the predominant partner in an alliance against 
Persia. By the constitution of the alliance, any constituent State was bound to contribute either a 
specified number of ships, or the cost of them. Most chose the latter, and thus Athens acquired 
naval supremacy over the other allies, and gradually transformed the alliance into an Athenian 
Empire. Athens became rich, and prospered under the wise leadership of Pericles, who governed, 
by the free choice of the citizens, for about thirty years, until his fall in 430 B.C. 

The age of Pericles was the happiest and most glorious time in the history of Athens. Aeschylus, 
who had fought in the Persian wars, inaugurated Greek tragedy; one of his tragedies, the Persae, 
departing from the custom of choosing Homeric subjects, deals with the defeat of Darius. He was 
quickly followed by Sophocles, and Sophocles by Euripides, who, however, extends into the dark 
days of 

-58- 



the Peloponnesian War that followed the fall and death of Pericles, and reflects in his plays the 
scepticism of the later period. His contemporary Aristophanes, the comic poet, makes fun of all 
isms from the standpoint of robust and limited common sense; more particularly, he holds up 
Socrates to obloquy as one who denies the existence of Zeus and dabbles in unholy pseudo- 
scientific mysteries. 

Athens had been captured by Xerxes, and the temples on the Acropolis had been destroyed by fire. 
Pericles devoted himself to their reconstruction. The Parthenon and the other temples whose ruins 
remain to impress our age were built by him. Pheidias the sculptor was employed by the State to 
make colossal statues of gods and goddesses. At the end of this period, Athens was the most 
beautiful and splendid city of the Hellenic world. 

Herodotus, the father of history, was a native of Halicarnassus, in Asia Minor, but lived in Athens, 
was encouraged by the Athenian State, and wrote his account of the Persian wars from the 
Athenian point of view. 

The achievements of Athens in the time of Pericles are perhaps the most astonishing thing in all 
history. Until that time, Athens had lagged behind many other Greek cities; neither in art nor in 
literature had it produced any great man (except Solon, who was primarily a lawgiver). Suddenly, 
under the stimulus of victory and wealth and the need of reconstruction, architects, sculptors, and 
dramatists, who remain unsurpassed to the present day, produced works which dominated the 
future down to modern times. This is the more surprising when we consider the smallness of the 
population involved. Athens at its maximum, about 430 B.C., is estimated to have numbered 
about 230,000 (including slaves), and the surrounding territory of rural Attica probably contained 
a rather smaller population. Never before or since has anything approaching the same proportion 
of the inhabitants of any area shown itself capable of work of the highest excellence. 

In philosophy, Athens contributes only two great names, Socrates and Plato. Plato belongs to a 
somewhat later period, but Socrates passed his youth and early manhood under Pericles. The 
Athenians were sufficiently interested in philosophy to listen eagerly to teachers from other cities. 
The Sophists were sought after by young men who wished to learn the art of disputation; in the 
Protagoras, the 


- 59 - 



Platonic Socrates gives an amusing satirical description of the ardent disciples hanging on the 
words of the eminent visitor. Pericles, as we shall see, imported Anaxagoras, from whom Socrates 
professed to have learned the pre-eminence of mind in creation. 

Most of Plato's dialogues are supposed by him to take place during the time of Pericles, and they 
give an agreeable picture of life among the rich. Plato belonged to an aristocratic Athenian family, 
and grew up in the tradition of the period before war and democracy had destroyed the wealth and 
security of the upper classes. His young men, who have no need to work, spend most of their 
leisure in the pursuit of science and mathematics and philosophy; they know Homer almost by 
heart, and are critical judges of the merits of professional reciters of poetry. The art of deductive 
reasoning had been lately discovered, and afforded the excitement of new theories, both true and 
false, over the whole field of knowledge. It was possible in that age, as in few others, to be both 
intelligent and happy, and happy through intelligence. 

But the balance of forces which produced this golden age was precarious. It was threatened both 
from within and from without-from within by the democracy, and from without by Sparta. To 
understand what happened after Pericles, we must consider briefly the earlier history of Attica. 

Attica, at the beginning of the historical period, was a self-supporting little agricultural region; 
Athens, its capital, was not large, but contained a growing population of artisans and skilled 
artificers who desired to dispose of their produce abroad. Gradually it was found more profitable 
to cultivate vines and olives rather than grain, and to import grain, chiefly from the coast of the 
Black Sea. This form of cultivation required more capital than the cultivation of grain, and the 
small farmers got into debt. Attica, like other Greek states, had been a monarchy in the Homeric 
age, but the king became a merely religious official without political power. The government fell 
into the hands of the aristocracy, who oppressed both the country fanners and the urban artisans. 

A compromise in the direction of democracy was effected by Solon early in the sixth century, and 
much of his work survived through a subsequent period of tyranny under Peisistratus and his sons. 
When this period came to an end, the aristo- 


- 60 - 



crats, as the opponents of tyranny, were able to recommend themselves to the democracy. Until 
the fall of Pericles, democratic processes gave power to the aristocracy, as in nineteenth century 
England. But towards the end of his life the leaders of the Athenian democracy began to demand a 
larger share of political power. At the same time, his imperialist policy, with which the economic 
prosperity of Athens was bound up, caused increasing friction with Sparta, leading at last to the 
Peloponnesian War ( 431-404), in which Athens was completely defeated. 

In spite of political collapse, the prestige of Athens survived, and throughout almost a millennium 
philosophy was centred there. Alexandria eclipsed Athens in mathematics and science, but 
Aristotle and Plato had made Athens philosophically supreme. The Academy, where Plato had 
taught, survived all other schools, and persisted, as an island of paganism, for two centuries after 
the conversion of the Roman Empire to Christianity. At last, in A.D. 529, it was closed by 
Justinian because of his religious bigotry, and the Dark Ages descended upon Europe. 

CHAPTER VIII Anaxagoras 

THE philosopher Anaxagoras, though not the equal of Pythagoras, Heraclitus, or Parmenides, has 
nevertheless a considerable historical importance. He was an Ionian, and carried on the scientific, 
rationalist tradition of Ionia. He was the first to introduce philosophy to the Athenians, and the 
first to suggest mind as the primary cause of physical changes. 

He was born at Clazomenae, in Ionia, about the year 500 B.C., but he spent about thirty years of 
his life in Athens, approximately from 462 to 432 B.C. He was probably induced to come by 
Pericles, who was bent on civilizing his fellow-townsmen. Perhaps Aspasia, who 

-61- 



came from Miletus, introduced him to Pericles. Plato, in the Phaedrus, says: 

Pericles "fell in, it seems with Anaxagoras, who was a scientific man; and satiating himself with 
the theory of things on high, and having attained to a knowledge of the true nature of intellect and 
folly, which were just what the discourses of Anaxagoras were mainly about, he drew from that 
source whatever was of a nature to further him in the art of speech." 

It is said that Anaxagoras also influenced Euripides, but this is more doubtful. 

The citizens of Athens, like those of other cities in other ages and continents, showed a certain 
hostility to those who attempted to introduce a higher level of culture than that to which they were 
accustomed. When Pericles was growing old, his opponents began a campaign against him by 
attacking his friends. They accused Pheidias of embezzling some of the gold that was to be 
employed on his statues. They passed a law permitting impeachment of those who did not practise 
religion and taught theories about "the things on high." Under this law, they prosecuted 
Anaxagoras, who was accused of teaching that the sun was a red-hot stone and the moon was 
earth. (The same accusation was repeated by the prosecutors of Socrates, who made fun of them 
for being out of date.) What happened is not certain, except that he had to leave Athens. It seems 
probable that Pericles got him out of prison and managed to get him away. He returned to Ionia, 
where he founded a school. In accordance with his will, the anniversary of his death was kept as a 
schoolchildrens' holiday. 

Anaxagoras held that everything is infinitely divisible, and that even the smallest portion of matter 
contains some of each element. Things appear to be that of which they contain most. Thus, for 
example, everything contains some fire, but we only call it fire if that element preponderates. Like 
Empedocles, he argues against the void, saying that the clepsydra or an inflated skin shows that 
there, is air where there seems to be nothing. 

He differed from his predecessors in regarding mind {nous) as a substance which enters into the 
composition of living things, and distinguishes them from dead matter. In everything, he says, 
there 


- 62 - 



is a portion of everything except mind, and some things contain mind also. Mind has power over 
all things that have life; it is infinite and self-ruled, and is mixed with nothing. Except as regards 
mind, everything, however small, contains portions of all opposites, such as hot and cold, white 
and black. He maintained that snow is black (in part). 

Mind is the source of all motion. It causes a rotation, which is gradually spreading throughout the 
world, and is causing the lightest things to go to the circumference, and the heaviest to fall 
towards the centre. Mind is unifonn, and is just as good in animals as in man. Man's apparent 
superiority is due to the fact that he has hands; all seeming differences of intelligence are really 
due to bodily differences. 

Both Aristotle and the Platonic Socrates complain that Anaxagoras, after introducing mind, makes 
very little use of it. Aristotle points out that he only introduces mind as a cause when he knows no 
other. Whenever he can, he gives a mechanical explanation. He rejected necessity and chance as 
giving the origins of things; nevertheless, there was no "Providence" in his cosmology. He does 
not seem to have thought much about ethics or religion; probably he was an atheist, as his 
prosecutors maintained. All his predecessors influenced him, except Pythagoras. The influence of 
Parmenides was the same in his case as in that of Empedocles. 

In science he had great merit. It was he who first explained that the moon shines by reflected light, 
though there is a cryptic fragment in Parmenides suggesting that he also knew this. Anaxagoras 
gave the correct theory of eclipses, and knew that the moon is below the sun. The sun and stars, he 
said, are fiery stones, but we do not feel the heat of the stars because they are too distant. The sun 
is larger than the Peloponnesus. The moon has mountains, and (he thought) inhabitants. 

Anaxagoras is said to have been of the school of Anaximenes; certainly he kept alive the 
rationalist and scientific tradition of the Ionians. One does not find in him the ethical and religious 
preoccupations which, passing from the Pythagoreans to Socrates and from Socrates to Plato, 
brought an obscurantist bias into Greek philosophy. He is not quite in the first rank, but he is 
important as the first to bring philosophy to Athens, and as one of the influences that helped to 
form Socrates. 


- 63 - 



CHAPTER IX The Atomists 


THE founders of atomism were two, Leucippus and Democritus. It is difficult to disentangle 
them, because they are generally mentioned together, and apparently some of the works of 
Leucippus were subsequently attributed to Democritus. Leucippus, who seems to have 
flourished about 440 B.C., ^_came from Miletus, and carried on the scientific rationalist 
philosophy associated with that city. He was much influenced by Parmenides and Zeno. So little 
is kn own of him that Epicurus (a later follower of Democritus) was thought to have denied his 
existence altogether, and some modems have revived this theory. There are, however, a number 
of allusions to him in Aristotle, and it seems incredible that these (which include textual 
quotations) would have occurred if he had been merely a myth. 

Democritus is a much more definite figure. He was a native of Abdera in Thrace; as for his 
date, he stated that he was young when Anaxagoras was old, say about 432 B.C., and he is taken 
to have flourished about 420 B.C. He travelled widely in southern and eastern lands in search of 
knowledge; he perhaps spent a considerable time in Egypt, and he certainly visited Persia. He 
then returned to Abdera, where he remained. Zeller calls him "superior to all earlier and 
contemporary philosophers in wealth of knowledge, and to most in acuteness and logical 
correctness of thinking." 

Democritus was a contemporary of Socrates and the Sophists, and should, on purely 
chronological grounds, be treated somewhat later in our history. The difficulty is that he is so 
hard to separate from Leucippus. On this ground, I am considering him before Socrates 


* Cyril Bailey, The Greek Atomists and Epicurus, estimates that he flourished about 430 
B.C. or a little earlier. 


- 64 - 


and the Sophists, although part of his philosophy was intended as an answer to Protagoras, his 
fellow-townsman and the most eminent of the Sophists. Protagoras, when he visited Athens, 
was received enthusiastically; Democritus, on the other hand, says: "I went to Athens, and no 
one knew me." For a long time, his philosophy was ignored in Athens; "It is not clear," says 
Bumet, "that Plato knew anything about Democritus. . . . Aristotle, on the other hand, kn ows 
Democritus well; for he too was an Ionian from the North." f_Plato never mentions him in the 
Dialogues, but is said by Diogenes Laertius to have disliked him so much that he wished all his 

books burnt. Heath esteems him highly as a mathematician. 

The fundamental ideas of the common philosophy of Leucippus and Democritus were due to 
the former, but as regards the working out it is hardly possible to disentangle them, nor is it, for 
our purposes, important to make the attempt. Leucippus, if not Democritus, was led to atomism 
in the attempt to mediate between monism and pluralism, as represented by Parmenides and 
Empedocles respectively. Their point of view was remarkably like that of modern science, and 
avoided most of the faults to which Greek speculation was prone. They believed that everything 
is composed of atoms, which are physically, but not geometrically, indivisible; that between the 
atoms there is empty space; that atoms are indestructible; that they always have been, and 
always will be, in motion; that there are an infinite number of atoms, and even of kinds of 
atoms, the differences being as regards shape and size. Aristotle a€j asserts that, according to 
the atomists, atoms also differ as regards heat, the spherical atoms, which compose fire, being 
the hottest; and as regards weight, he quotes Democritus as saying "The more any indivisible 
exceeds, the heavier it is." But the question whether atoms are originally possessed of weight in 
the theories of the atomists is a controversial one. 

The atoms were always in motion, but there is disagreement among commentators as to the 
character of the original motion. Some, especially Zeller, hold that the atoms were thought to be 
always falling, and that the heavier ones fell faster; they thus caught up the lighter, ones, there 
were impacts, and the atoms were deflected like billiard 


* From Thales to Plato, p. 193. 
a 

^ Greek Mathematics, Vol. I, p. 176. 
a 

€ On Generation and Corruption, 326 . 
i 


- 65 - 


balls. This was certainly the view of Epicurus, who in most respects based his theories on those 
of Democritus, while trying, rather unintelligently, to take account of Aristotle's criticisms. But 
there is considerable reason to think that weight was not an original property of the atoms of 
Leucippus and Democritus. It seems more probable that, on their view, atoms were originally 
moving at random, as in the modem kinetic theory of gases. Democritus said there was neither 
up nor down in the infinite void, and compared the movement of atoms in the soul to that of 
motes in a sunbeam when there is no wind. This is a much more intelligent view than that of 
Epicurus, and I think we may assume it to have been that of Leucippus and Democritus. 

As a result of collisions, collections of atoms came to form vortices. The rest proceeded much 
as in Anaxagoras, but it was an advance to explain the vortices mechanically rather than as due 
to the action of mind. 

It was common in antiquity to reproach the atomists with attributing everything to chance. They 
were, on the contrary, strict determinists, who believed that everything happens in accordance 

with natural laws. Democritus explicitly denied that anything can happen by chance. — 
Leucippus, though his existence is questioned, is known to have said one thing: "Naught 
happens for nothing, but everything from a ground and of necessity." It is hue that he gave no 
reason why the world should originally have been as it was; this, perhaps, might have been 
attributed to chance. But when once the world existed, its further development was unalterably 
fixed by mechanical principles. Aristotle and others reproached him and Democritus for not 
accounting for the original motion of the atoms, but in this the atomists were more scientific 
than their critics. Causation must start from something, and wherever it starts no cause can be 
assigned for the initial datum. The world may be attributed to a Creator, but even then the 
Creator Himself is unaccounted for. The theory of the atomists, in fact, was more nearly that of 
modem science than any other theory propounded in antiquity. 

The atomists, unlike Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, sought to ex- 


* This interpretation is adopted by Burnet, and also, at least as regards Leucippus, by Bailey 
{op. cit. p. 83). 

a 

e See Bailey, op. cit., p. 121, on the determinism of Democritus. 


- 66 - 


plain the world without introducing the notion of purpose or final cause. The "final cause" of an 
occurrence is an event in the future for the sake of which the occurrence takes place. In human 
affairs, this conception is applicable. Why does the baker make bread? Because people will be 
hungry. Why are railways built? Because people will wish to travel. In such cases, things are 
explained by the purpose they serve. When we ask "why?" concerning an event, we may mean 
either of two things. We may mean: "What purpose did this event serve?" or we may mean: "What 
earlier circumstances caused this event?" The answer to the fonner question is a teleological 
explanation, or an explanation by final causes; the answer to the latter question is a mechanistic 
explanation. I do not see how it could have been known in advance which of these two questions 
science ought to ask, or whether it ought to ask both. But experience has shown that the 
mechanistic question leads to scientific knowledge, while the teleological question does not. The 
atomists asked the mechanistic question, and gave a mechanistic answer. Their successors, until 
the Renaissance, were more interested in the teleological question, and thus led science up a blind 
alley. 

In regard to both questions alike, there is a limitation which is often ignored, both in popular 
thought and in philosophy. Neither question can be asked intelligibly about reality as a whole 
(including God), but only about parts of it. As regards the teleological explanation, it usually 
arrives, before long, at a Creator, or at least an Artificer, whose purposes are realized in the course 
of nature. But if a man is so obstinately teleological as to continue to ask what purpose is served 
by the Creator, it becomes obvious that his question is impious. It is, moreover, unmeaning, since, 
to make it significant, we should have to suppose the Creator created by some super-Creator 
whose purposes He served. The conception of purpose, therefore, is only applicable within reality, 
not to reality as a whole. 

A not dissimilar argument applies to mechanistic explanations. One event is caused by another, 
the other by a third, and so on. But if we ask for a cause of the whole, we are driven again to the 
Creator, who must Himself be uncaused. All causal explanations, therefore, must have an arbitrary 
beginning. That is why it is no defect in the theory of the atomists to have left the original 
movements of the atoms unaccounted for. 


- 67 - 



It must not be supposed that their reasons for their theories were wholly empirical. The atomic 
theory was revived in modem times to explain the facts of chemistry, but these facts were not 
known to the Greeks. There was no very sharp distinction, in ancient times, between empirical 
observation and logical argument. Parmenides, it is true, treated observed facts with contempt, 
but Empedocles and Anaxagoras would combine much of their metaphysics with observations 
on water-clocks and whirling buckets. Until the Sophists, no philosopher seems to have doubted 
that a complete metaphysic and cosmology could be established by a combination of much 
reasoning and some observation. By good luck, the atomists hit on a hypothesis for which, more 
than two thousand years later, some evidence was found, but their belief, in their day, was none 
the less destitute of any solid foundation. 

Like the other philosophers of his time, Leucippus was concerned to find a way of reconciling 
the arguments of Parmenides with the obvious fact of motion and change. As Aristotle says: — 

Although these opinions [those of Parmenides] appear to follow logically in a dialectical 
discussion, yet to believe them seems next door to madness when one considers the facts. For 
indeed no lunatic seems to be so far out of his senses as to suppose that fire and ice are "one": it 
is only between what is right and what seems right from habit that some people are mad enough 
to see no difference. 

Leucippus, however, thought he had a theory which harmonized with sense-perception and 
would not abolish either coming-to-be and passing-away or motion and the multiplicity of 
things. He made these concessions to the facts of perception: on the other hand, he conceded to 
the Monists that there could be no motion without a void. The result is a theory which he states 
as follows: "The void is a not-being, and no part of what is is a not-being; for what is in the 
strict sense of the term is an absolute plenum. This plenum, however, is not one ; on the 
contrary, it is a many infinite in number and invisible owing to the minuteness of their bulk. 

The many move in the void (for there is a void): and by coming together they produce coming- 
to-be, while by separating they pro- 


* On the logical and mathematical grounds for the theories of the atomists, see Gaston 
Milhaud, Les Philosophes GA©omA"tres de la GrA'ce, Ch. IV. 

a 

e On Generation and Corruption, 325 a. 


- 68 - 


duce passing-away. Moreover, they act and suffer action whenever they chance to be in contact 
(for there they are not one), and they generate by being put together and becoming intertwined. 
From the genuinely one, on the other hand, there could never have come to be a multiplicity, 
nor from the genuinely many a one: that is impossible." 

It will be seen that there was one point on which everybody so far was agreed, namely that there 
could be no motion in a plenum. In this, all alike were mistaken. There can be cyclic motion in 
a plenum, provided it has always existed. The idea was that a thing could only move into an 
empty place, and that, in a plenum, there are no empty places. It might be contended, perhaps 
validly, that motion could never begin in a plenum, but it cannot be validly maintained that it 
could not occur at all. To the Greeks, however, it seemed that one must either acquiesce in the 
unchanging world of Parmenides, or admit the void. 

Now the arguments of Parmenides against not-being seemed logically irrefutable against the 
void, and they were reinforced by the discovery that where there seems to be nothing there is 
air. (This is an example of the confused mixture of logic and observation that was common.) 

We may put the Parmenidean position in this way: "You say there is the void; therefore the void 
is not nothing; therefore it is not the void." It cannot be said that the atomists answered this 
argument; they merely proclaimed that they proposed to ignore it, on the ground that motion is a 
fact of experience, and therefore there must be a void, however difficult it may be to conceive. * 

Let us consider the subsequent history of this problem. The first and most obvious way of 
avoiding the logical difficulty is to distinguish between matter and space. According to this 
view, space is not nothing, but is of the nature of a receptacle, which may or may not have any 
given part filled with matter. Aristotle says ( Physics, 208 b): "The theory that the void exists 
involves the existence of place: for 


* Bailey (op. cit. p. 75) maintains, on the contrary, that Leucippus had an answer, which was 
"extremely subtle." It consisted essentially in admitting the existence of something (the 
void) which was not corporeal. Similarly Bumet says: "It is a curious fact that the 
Atomists, who are commonly regarded as the great materialists of antiquity, were actually 
the first to say distinctly that a thing might be real without being a body." 


- 69 - 


one would define void as place bereft of body." This view is set forth with the utmost explicitness 
by Newton, who asserts the existence of absolute space, and accordingly distinguishes absolute 
from relative motion. In the Copernican controversy, both sides (however little they may have 
realized it) were committed to this view, since they thought there was a difference between saying 
"the heavens revolve from east to west" and saying "the earth rotates from west to east." If all 
motion is relative, these two statements are merely different ways of saying the same thing, like 
"John is the father of James" and "James is the son of John." But if all motion is relative, and 
space is not substantial, we are left with the Pannenidean arguments against the void on our 
hands. 

Descartes, whose arguments are of just the same sort as those of early Greek philosophers, said 
that extension is the essence of matter, and therefore there is matter everywhere. For him, 
extension is an adjective, not a substantive; its substantive is matter, and without its substantive it 
cannot exist. Empty space, to him, is as absurd as happiness without a sentient being who is 
happy. Leibniz, on somewhat different grounds, also believed in the plenum, but he maintained 
that space is merely a system of relations. On this subject there was a famous controversy between 
him and Newton, the latter represented by Clarke. The controversy remained undecided until the 
time of Einstein, whose theory conclusively gave the victory to Leibniz. 

The modem physicist, while he still believes that matter is in some sense atomic, does not believe 
in empty space. Where there is not matter, there is still something, notably light-waves. Matter no 
longer has the lofty status that it acquired in philosophy through the arguments of Parmenides. It is 
not unchanging substance, but merely a way of grouping events. Some events belong to groups 
that can be regarded as material things; others, such as light-waves, do not. It is the events that are 
the stuff of the world, and each of them is of brief duration. In this respect, modem physics is on 
the side of Heraclitus as against Parmenides. But it was on the side of Parmenides until Einstein 
and quantum theory. 

As regards space, the modern view is that it is neither a substance, as Newton maintained, and as 
Leucippus and Democritus ought to have said, nor an adjective of extended bodies, as Descartes 
thought, 


- 70 - 



but a system of relations, as Leibniz held. It is not by any means clear whether this view is 
compatible with the existence of the void. Perhaps, as a matter of abstract logic, it can be 
reconciled with the void. We might say that, between any two things, there is a certain greater 
or smaller distance, and that distance does not imply the existence of intermediate things. Such 
a point of view, however, would be impossible to utilize in modem physics. Since Einstein, 
distance is between events, not between things, and involves time as well as space. It is 
essentially a causal conception, and in modern physics there is no action at a distance. All this, 
however, is based upon empirical rather than logical grounds. Moreover the modem view 
cannot be stated except in terms of differential equations, and would therefore be unintelligible 
to the philosophers of antiquity. 

It would seem, accordingly, that the logical development of the views of the atomists is the 
Newtonian theory of absolute space, which meets the difficulty of attributing reality to not- 
being. To this theory there are no logical objections. The chief objection is that absolute space 
is absolutely unknowable, and cannot therefore be a necessary hypothesis in an empirical 
science. The more practical objection is that physics can get on without it. But the world of the 
atomists remains logically possible, and is more akin to the actual world than is the world of 
any other of the ancient philosophers. 

Democritus worked out his theories in considerable detail, and some of the working out is 
interesting. Each atom, he said, was impenetrable and indivisible because it contained no void. 
When you use a knife to cut an apple, the knife has to find empty places where it can penetrate; 
if the apple contained no void, it would be infinitely hard and therefore physically indivisible. 
Each atom is internally unchanging, and in fact a Parmenidean One. The only things that atoms 
do are to move and hit each other, and sometimes to combine when they happen to have shapes 
that are capable of interlocking. They are of all sorts of shapes; fire is composed of small 
spherical atoms, and so is the soul. Atoms, by collision, produce vortices, which generate 
bodies and ultimately worlds. jiTherc are many worlds, some growing, some decaying; some 
may have no sun or moon, some several. Every world has a beginning and an end. A world may 
be 


* On the way in which this was supposed to happen, see Bailey, op. cit., p. 138 ff. 


- 71 - 


destroyed by collision with a larger world. This cosmology may be summarized in Shelley's 
words: 

Worlds on worlds are rolling ever From creation to decay, Like the bubbles on a river 

Sparkling, bursting, borne away. 

Life developed out of the primeval slime. There is some fire everywhere in a living body, but 
most in the brain or in the breast. (On this, authorities differ.) Thought is a kind of motion, and 
is thus able to cause motion elsewhere. Perception and thought are physical processes. 
Perception is of two sorts, one of the senses, one of the understanding. Perceptions of the latter 
sort depend only on the things perceived, while those of the former sort depend also on our 
senses, and are therefore apt to be deceptive. Like Locke, Democritus held that such qualities as 
warmth, taste, and colour are not really in the object, but are due to our sense-organs, while 
such qualities as weight, density, and hardness are really in the object. 

Democritus was a thorough-going materialist; for him, as we have seen, the soul was composed 
of atoms, and thought was a physical process. There was no purpose in the universe; there were 
only atoms governed by mechanical laws. Fie disbelieved in popular religion, and he argued 
against the nous of Anaxagoras. In ethics he considered cheerfulness the goal of life, and 
regarded moderation and culture as the best means to it. He disliked everything violent and 
passionate; he disapproved of sex, because, he said, it involved the overwhelming of 
consciousness by pleasure. He valued friendship, but thought ill of women, and did not desire 
children, because their education interferes with philosophy. In all this, he was very like Jeremy 
Bentham; he was equally so in his love of what the Greeks called democracy. 

Democritus— such, at least, is my opinion-is the last of the Greek philosophers to be free from a 
certain fault which vitiated all later ancient and medieval thought. All the philosophers we have 
been considering so far were engaged in a disinterested effort to understand the world. They 
thought it easier to understand than it is, but without this optimism they would not have had the 
courage to make a 


* "Poverty in a democracy is as much to be preferred to what is called prosperity under 
despots as freedom is to slavery," he says. 


- 72 - 


beginning. Their attitude, in the main, was genuinely scientific whenever it did not merely 
embody the prejudices of their age. But it was not only scientific; it was imaginative and vigorous 
and filled with the delight of adventure. They were interested in everything— meteors and eclipses, 
fishes and whirlwinds, religion and morality; with a penetrating intellect they combined the zest of 
children. 

From this point onwards, there are first certain seeds of decay, in spite of previously unmatched 
achievement, and then a gradual decadence. What is amiss, even in the best philosophy after 
Democritus, is an undue emphasis on man as compared with the universe. First comes scepticism, 
with the Sophists, leading to a study of how we know rather than to the attempt to acquire fresh 
knowledge. Then comes, with Socrates, the emphasis on ethics; with Plato, the rejection of the 
world of sense in favour of the self-created world of pure thought; with Aristotle, the belief in 
purpose as the fundamental concept in science. In spite of the genius of Plato and Aristotle, their 
thought has vices which proved infinitely harmful. After their time, there was a decay of vigour, 
and a gradual recrudescence of popular superstition. A partially new outlook arose as a result of 
the victory of Catholic orthodoxy; but it was not until the Renaissance that philosophy regained 
the vigour and independence that characterize the predecessors of Socrates. 

CHAPTER X Protagoras 

THE great pre-Socratic systems that we have been considering were confronted, in the latter half 
of the fifth century, by a sceptical movement, in which the most important figure was Protagoras, 
chief of the Sophists. The word "Sophist" had originally no bad connotation; it meant, as nearly as 
may be, what we mean by "professor." A Sophist was a man who made his living by teaching 
young men certain things that, it was thought, would be useful to them 

- 73 - 



in practical life. As there was no public provision for such education, the Sophists taught only 
those who had private means, or whose parents had. This tended to give them a certain class bias, 
which was increased by the political circumstances of the time. In Athens and many other cities, 
democracy was politically triumphant, but nothing had been done to diminish the wealth of those 
who belonged to the old aristocratic families. It was, in the main, the rich who embodied what 
appears to us as Hellenic culture: they had education and leisure, travel had taken the edge off 
their traditional prejudices, and the time that they spent in discussion sharpened their wits. What 
was called democracy did not touch the institution of slavery, which enabled the rich to enjoy their 
wealth without oppressing free citizens. 

In many cities, however, and especially in Athens, the poorer citizens had towards the rich a 
double hostility, that of envy, and that of traditionalism. The rich were supposed— often with 
justice— to be impious and immoral; they were subverting ancient beliefs, and probably trying to 
destroy democracy. It thus happened that political democracy was associated with cultural 
conservatism, while those who were cultural innovators tended to be political reactionaries. 
Somewhat the same situation exists in modern America, where Tammany, as a mainly Catholic 
organization, is engaged in defending traditional theological and ethical dogmas against the 
assaults of enlightenment. But the enlightened are politically weaker in America than they were in 
Athens, because they have failed to make common cause with the plutocracy. There is, however, 
one important and highly intellectual class which is concerned with the fence of the plutocracy, 
namely the class of corporation lawyers. In some respects, their functions are similar to those that 
were performed in Athens by the Sophists. 

Athenian democracy, though it had the grave limitation of not including slaves or women, was in 
some respects more democratic than any modern system. Judges and most executive officers were 
chosen by lot, and served for short periods; they were thus average citizens, like our jurymen, with 
the prejudices and lack of professionalism characteristic of average citizens. In general, there were 
a large number of judges to hear each case. The plaintiff and defendant, or 


- 74 - 



prosecutor and accused, appeared in person, not through professional lawyers. Naturally, 
success or failure depended largely on oratorical skill in appealing to popular prejudices. 
Although a man had to deliver his own speech, he could hire an expert to write the speech for 
him, or, as many preferred, he could pay for instruction in the arts required for success in the 
law courts. These arts the Sophists were supposed to teach. 

The age of Pericles is analogous, in Athenian history, to the Victorian age in the history of 
England. Athens was rich and powerful, not much troubled by wars, and possessed of a 
democratic constitution administered by aristocrats. As we have seen in connection with 
Anaxagoras, a democratic opposition to Pericles gradually gathered strength, and attacked his 
friends one by one. The Peloponnesian War broke out in 43 1 B.C.; jyAthens (in common with 
many other places) was ravaged by the plague; the population, which had been about 230,000, 
was greatly reduced, and never rose again to its former level ( Bury, History of Greece, I, p. 
444). Pericles himself, in 430 B.C., was deposed from the office of general and fined for 
misappropriation of public money by a court composed of 1501 judges. His two sons died of 
the plague, and he himself died in the following year (429). Pheidias and Anaxagoras were 
condemned; Aspasia was prosecuted for impiety and for keeping a disorderly house, but 
acquitted. 

In such a community, it was natural that men who were likely to incur the hostility of 
democratic politicians should wish to acquire forensic skill. For Athens, though much addicted 
to persecution, was in one respect less illiberal than modem America, since those accused of 
impiety and corrupting the young were allowed to plead in their own defence. 

This explains the popularity of the Sophists with one class and their unpopularity with another. 
But in their own minds they served more impersonal purposes, and it is clear that many of them 
were genuinely concerned with philosophy. Plato devoted himself to caricaturing and vilifying 
them, but they must not be judged by his polemics. In his lighter vein, take the following 
passage from the Euthydemus, in which two Sophists, Dionysodorus and Euthydemus, 


* It ended in 404 B.C. with the complete overthrow of Athens. 


- 75 - 


set to work to puzzle a simple-minded person named Clesippus. Dionysodorus begins: 


You say that you have a dog? Yes, a villain of a one, said Clesippus. And he has puppies? Yes, 
and they are very like himself. And the dog is the father of them? Yes, he said, I certainly saw him 
and the mother of the puppies come together. And is he not yours? To be sure he is. Then he is a 
father, and he is yours; ergo, he is your father, and the puppies are your brothers. 

In a more serious vein, take the dialogue called The Sophist. This is a logical discussion of 
definition, which uses the sophist as an illustration. With its logic we are not at present concerned; 
the only thing I wish to mention at the moment as regards this dialogue is the final conclusion: 

"He, then, who traces the pedigree of his (the Sophist's) art as follows— who, belonging to the 
conscious or dissembling section of the art of causing self-contradiction, is an imitator of 
appearance, and is separated from the class of phantastic which is a branch of image-making into 
that further division of creation, the juggling of words, a creation human, and not divine— any one 
who affirms the real Sophist to be of this blood and lineage will say the very truth." 

There is a story about Protagoras, no doubt apocryphal, which illustrates the connection of the 
Sophists with the law-courts in the popular mind. It is said that he taught a young man on the 
terms that he should be paid his fee if the young man won his first law-suit, but not otherwise, and 
that the young man’s first law-suit was one brought by Protagoras for recovery of his fee. 

However, it is time to leave these preliminaries and see what is really known about Protagoras. 

Protagoras was born about 500 B.C., at Abdera, the city from which Democritus came. He twice 
visited Athens, his second visit being not later than 432 B.C. He made a code of laws for the city 
of Thurii in 444-3 B.C. There is a tradition that he was prosecuted for impiety, 


- 76 - 



but this seems to be untrue, in spite of the fact that he wrote a book On the Gods, which began: 
"With regard to the gods, I cannot feel sure either that they are or that they are not, nor what they 
are like in figure; for there are many things that hinder sure knowledge, the obscurity of the 
subject and the shortness of human life." 

His second visit to Athens is described somewhat satirically in Plato Protagoras, and his doctrines 
are discussed seriously in the Theaetetus. He is chiefly noted for his doctrine that "Man is the 
measure of all things, of things that are that they are, and of things that are not that they are not." 
This is interpreted as meaning that each man is the measure of all things, and that, when men 
differ, there is no objective truth in virtue of which one is right and the other wrong. The doctrine 
is essentially sceptical, and is presumably based on the "deceitfulness" of the senses. 

One of the three founders of pragmatism, F.C.S. Schiller, was in the habit of calling himself a 
disciple of Protagoras. This was, I think, because Plato, in the Theaetetus, suggests, as an 
interpretation of Protagoras, that one opinion can be better than another, though it cannot be truer. 
For example, when a man has jaundice everything looks yellow. There is no sense in saying that 
things are really not yellow, but the colour they look to a man in health; we can say, however, that, 
since health is better than sickness, the opinion of the man in health is better than that of the man 
who has jaundice. This point of view, obviously, is akin to pragmatism. 

The disbelief in objective truth makes the majority, for practical purposes, the arbiters as to what 
to believe. Hence Protagoras was led to a defence of law and convention and traditional morality. 
While, as we saw, he did not know whether the gods existed, he was sure they ought to be 
worshipped. This point of view is obviously the right one for a man whose theoretical scepticism 
is thoroughgoing and logical. 

Protagoras spent his adult life in a sort of perpetual lecture tour through the cities of Greece, 
teaching, for a fee, "any one who desired practical efficiency and higher mental culture" ( Zeller, 
p. 1299). Plato objects— somewhat snobbishly, according to modern notions-to the Sophists' 
practice of charging money for instruction. Plato himself had adequate private means, and was 
unable, apparently, to realize the necessities of those who had not his good fortune. It is odd that 


- 77 - 



modem professors, who see no reason to refuse a salary, have so frequently repeated Plato's 
strictures. 

There was, however, another point in which the Sophists differed from most contemporary 
philosophers. It was usual, except among the Sophists, for a teacher to found a school, which had 
some of the properties of a brotherhood; there was a greater or smaller amount of common life, 
there was often something analogous to a monastic rule, and there was usually an esoteric doctrine 
not proclaimed to the public. All this was natural wherever philosophy had arisen out of Orphism. 
Among the Sophists there was none of this. What they had to teach was not, in their minds, 
connected with religion or virtue. They taught the art of arguing, and as much knowledge as 
would help in this art. Broadly speaking, they were prepared, like modem lawyers, to show how to 
argue for or against any opinion, and were not concerned to advocate conclusions of their own. 
Those to whom philosophy was a way of life, closely bound up with religion, were naturally 
shocked; to them, the Sophists appeared frivolous and immoral. 

To some extent— though it is impossible to say how far— the odium which the Sophists incurred, 
not only with the general public, but with Plato and subsequent philosophers, was due to their 
intellectual merit. The pursuit of truth, when it is whole-hearted, must ignore moral 
considerations; we cannot know in advance that the truth will turn out to be what is thought 
edifying in a given society. The Sophists were prepared to follow an argument wherever it might 
lead them. Often it led them to scepticism. One of them, Gorgias, maintained that nothing exists; 
that if anything exists, it is unknowable; and granting it even to exist and to be knowable by any 
one man, he could never communicate it to others. We do not know what his arguments were, but 
I can well imagine that they had a logical force which compelled his opponents to take refuge in 
edification. Plato is always concerned to advocate views that will make people what he thinks 
virtuous; he is hardly ever intellectually honest, because he allows himself to judge doctrines by 
their social consequences. Even about this, he is not honest; he pretends to follow the argument 
and to be judging by purely theoretical standards, when in fact he is twisting the discussion so as 
to lead to a virtuous result. He introduced this vice into philosophy, where it has persisted ever 
since. It was prob- 


- 78 - 



ably largely hostility to the Sophists that gave this character to his dialogues. One of the defects of 
all philosophers since Plato is that their inquiries into ethics proceed on the assumption that they 
already know the conclusions to be reached. 

It seems that there were men, in the Athens of the late fifth century, who taught political doctrines 
which seemed immoral to their contemporaries, and seem so to the democratic nations of the 
present day. Thrasymachus, in the first book of the Republic, argues that there is no justice except 
the interest of the stronger; that laws are made by governments for their own advantage; and that 
there is no impersonal standard to which to appeal in contests for power. Callicles, according to 
Plato (in the Gorgias), maintained a similar doctrine. The law of nature, he said, is the law of the 
stronger; but for convenience men have established institutions and moral precepts to restrain the 
strong. Such doctrines have won much wider assent in our day than they did in antiquity. And 
whatever may be thought of them, they are not characteristic of the Sophists. 

During the fifth century— whatever part the Sophists may have had in the change— there was in 
Athens a transfonnation from a certain stiff Puritan simplicity to a quick-witted and rather cruel 
cynicism in conflict with a slow-witted and equally cruel defence of crumbling orthodoxy. At the 
beginning of the century comes the Athenian championship of the cities of Ionia against the 
Persians, and the victory of Marathon in 490 B.C. At the end comes the defeat of Athens by Sparta 
in 404 B.C., and the execution of Socrates in 399 B.C. After this time Athens ceased to be 
politically important, but acquired undoubted cultural supremacy, which it retained until the 
victory of Christianity. 

Something of the history of fifth-century Athens is essential to the understanding of Plato and of 
all subsequent Greek thought. In the first Persian war, the chief glory went to the Athenians, 
owing to the decisive victory at Marathon. In the second war, ten years later, the Athenians still 
were the best of the Greeks at sea, but on land victory was mainly due to the Spartans, who were 
the acknowledged leaders of the Hellenic world. The Spartans, however, were narrowly provincial 
in their outlook, and ceased to oppose the Persians when they had been chased out of European 
Greece. The championship of the Asiatic Greeks, and the liberation of the islands that had been 
con- 


- 79 - 



quered by the Persians, was undertaken, with great success, by Athens. Athens became the leading 
sea power, and acquired a considerable imperialist control over the Ionian islands. Under the 
leadership of Pericles, who was a moderate democrat and a moderate imperialist, Athens 
prospered. The great temples, whose ruins are still the glory of Athens, were built by his initiative, 
to replace those destroyed by Xerxes. The city increased very rapidly in wealth, and also in 
culture, and, as invariably happens at such times, particularly when wealth is due to foreign 
commerce, traditional morality and traditional beliefs decayed. 

There was at this time in Athens an extraordinarily large number of men of genius. The three great 
dramatists, Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides, all belong to the fifth century. Aeschylus fought 
at Marathon and saw the battle of Salamis. Sophocles was still religiously orthodox. But Euripides 
was influenced by Protagoras and by the free-thinking spirit of the time, and his treatment of the 
myths is sceptical and subversive. Aristophanes, the comic poet, made fun of Socrates, Sophists, 
and philosophers, but nevertheless belonged to their circle; in the Symposium Plato represents him 
as on very friendly tenns with Socrates. Pheidias the sculptor, as we have seen, belonged to the 
circle of Pericles. 

The excellence of Athens, at this period, was artistic rather than intellectual. None of the great 
mathematicians or philosophers of the fifth century were Athenians, with the exception of 
Socrates; and Socrates was not a writer, but a man who confined himself to oral discussion. 

The outbreak of the Peloponnesian War in 43 1 B.C. and the death of Pericles in 429 B.C. 
introduced a darker period in Athenian history. The Athenians were superior at sea, but the 
Spartans had supremacy on land, and repeatedly occupied Attica (except Athens) during the 
summer. The result was that Athens was overcrowded, and suffered severely from the plague. In 
414 B.C. the Athenians sent a large expedition to Sicily, in the hope of capturing Syracuse, which 
was allied with Sparta; but the attempt was a failure. War made the Athenians fierce and 
persecuting. In 416 B.C. they conquered the island of Melos, put to death all men of military age, 
and enslaved the other inhabitants. The Trojan Women of Euripides is a protest against such 
barbarism. The conflict had an ideological aspect, since Sparta was 

- 80 - 

the champion of oligarchy and Athens of democracy. The Athenians had reason to suspect some 
of their own aristocrats of treachery, which was generally thought to have had a part in the final 
naval defeat at the battle of Aegospotami in 405 B.C. 

At the end of the war, the Spartans established in Athens an oligarchial government, known as the 
Thirty Tyrants. Some of the Thirty, including Critias, their chief, had been pupils of Socrates. 

They were deservedly unpopular, and were overthrown within a year. With the compliance of 
Sparta, democracy was restored, but it was an embittered democracy, precluded by an amnesty 
from direct vengeance against its internal enemies, but glad of any pretext, not covered by the 
amnesty, for prosecuting them. It was in this atmosphere that the trial and death of Socrates took 
place ( 399 B.C.)., 


- 81 - 



Part II. Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle 
CHAPTER XI Socrates 


SOCRATES is a very difficult subject for the historian. There are many men concerning whom it 
is certain that very little is known, and other men concerning whom it is certain that a great deal is 
known; but in the case of Socrates the uncertainty is as to whether we know very little or a great 
deal. He was undoubtedly an Athenian citizen of moderate means, who spent his time in 
disputation, and taught philosophy to the young, but not for money, like the Sophists. He was 
certainly tried, condemned to death, and executed in 399 B. C., at about the age of seventy. He 
was unquestionably a well-known figure in Athens, since Aristophanes caricatured him in The 
Clouds. But beyond this point we become involved in controversy. Two of his pupils, Xenophon 
and Plato, wrote voluminously about him, but they said very different things. Even when they 
agree, it has been suggested by Burnet that Xenophon is copying Plato. Where they disagree, some 
believe the one, some the other, some neither. In such a dangerous dispute, I shall not venture to 
take sides, but I will set out briefly the various points of view. 

Let us begin with Xenophon, a military man, not very liberally endowed with brains, and on the 
whole conventional in his outlook. Xenophon is pained that Socrates should have been accused of 
impiety and of corrupting the youth; he contends that, on the contrary, Socrates was eminently 
pious and had a thoroughly wholesome effect upon those who came under his influence. His 
ideas, it appears, so 


- 82 - 



far from being subversive, were rather dull and commonplace. This defence goes too far, since it 
leaves the hostility to Socrates unexplained. As Bumet says ( Thales to Plato, p. 149): 
"Xenophon's defence of Socrates is too successful. He would never have been put to death if he 
had been like that." 

There has been a tendency to think that everything Xenophon says must be true, because he had 
not the wits to think of anything untrue. This is a very invalid line of argument. A stupid man’s 
report of what a clever man says is never accurate, because he unconsciously translates what he 
hears into something that he can understand. I would rather be reported by my bitterest enemy 
among philosophers than by a friend innocent of philosophy. We cannot therefore accept what 
Xenophon says if it either involves any difficult point in philosophy or is part of an argument to 
prove that Socrates was unjustly condemned. 

Nevertheless, some of Xenophon's reminiscences are very convincing. He tells (as Plato also 
does) how Socrates was continually occupied with the problem of getting competent men into 
positions of power. He would ask such questions as: "If I wanted a shoe mended, whom should I 
employ?" To which some ingenuous youth would answer: "A shoemaker, O Socrates." He would 
go on to carpenters, coppersmiths, etc., and finally ask some such question as "who should mend 
the Ship of State?" When he fell into conflict with the Thirty Tyrants, Critias, their chief, who 
knew his ways from having studied under him, forbade him to continue teaching the young, and 
added: "You had better be done with your shoemakers, carpenters, and coppersmiths. These must 
be pretty well trodden out at heel by this time, considering the circulation you have given them" 

( Xenophon, Memorabilia, Bk. I, Chap. II). This happened during the brief oligarchic government 
established by the Spartans at the end of the Peloponnesian War. But at most times Athens was 
democratic, so much so that even generals were elected or chosen by lot. Socrates came across a 
young man who wished to become a general, and persuaded him that it would be well to know 
something of the art of war. The young man accordingly went away and took a brief course in 
tactics. When he returned, Socrates, after some satirical praise, sent him back for further 
instruction (ib. Bk. Ill, Chap I). Another young man he set to learning the principles of 


- 83 - 



finance. He tried the same sort of plan on many people, including the war minister; but it was 
decided that it was easier to silence him by means of the hemlock than to cure the evils of which 
he complained. 

With Plato's account of Socrates, the difficulty is quite a different one from what it is in the case 
of Xenophon, namely, that it is very hard to judge how far Plato means to portray the historical 
Socrates, and how far he intends the person called "Socrates" in his dialogues to be merely the 
mouthpiece of his own opinions. Plato, in addition to being a philosopher, is an imaginative writer 
of great genius and charm. No one supposes, and he himself does not seriously pretend, that the 
conversations in his dialogues took place just as he records them. Nevertheless, at any rate in the 
earlier dialogues, the conversation is completely natural and the characters quite convincing. It is 
the excellence of Plato as a writer of fiction that throws doubt on him as a historian. His Socrates 
is a consistent and extraordinarily interesting character, far beyond the power of most men to 
invent; but I think PlatocowW have invented him. Whether he did so is of course another question. 

The dialogue which is most generally regarded as historical is the Apology. This professes to be 
the speech that Socrates made in his own fence at his trial— not, of course, a stenographic report, 
but what remained in Plato's memory some years after the event, put together and elaborated with 
literary art. Plato was present at the trial, and it certainly seems fairly clear that what is set down is 
the sort of thing that Plato remembered Socrates as saying, and that the intention is, broadly 
speaking, historical. This, with all its limitations, is enough to give a fairly definite picture of the 
character of Socrates. 

The main facts of the trial of Socrates are not open to doubt. The prosecution was based upon the 
charge that "Socrates is an evil-doer and a curious person, searching into things under the earth 
and above the heaven; and making the worse appear the better cause, and teaching all this to 
others." The real ground of hostility to him was, almost certainly, that he was supposed to be 
connected with the aristocratic party ; most of his pupils belonged to this faction, and some, in 
positions of power, had proved themselves very pernicious. But this ground could not be made 
evident, on account of the amnesty. He was found guilty by a majority, and it was then open to 
him, by 


- 84 - 



Athenian law, to propose some lesser penalty than death. The judges had to choose, if they had 
found the accused guilty, between the penalty demanded by the prosecution and that suggested 
by the defence. It was therefore to the interest of Socrates to suggest a substantial penalty, 
which the court might have accepted as adequate. He, however, proposed a fine of thirty minae, 
for which some of his friends (including Plato) were willing to go surety. This was so small a 
punishment that the court was annoyed, and condemned him to death by a larger majority than 
that which had found him guilty. Undoubtedly he foresaw this result. It is clear that he had no 
wish to avoid the death penalty by concessions which might seem to acknowledge his guilt. 

The prosecutors were Anytus, a democratic politician; Meletus, a tragic poet, "youthful and 
unknown, with lanky hair, and scanty beard, and a hooked nose"; and Lykon, an obscure 
rhetorician. (See Bumet, Thales to Plato, p. 180.) They maintained that Socrates was guilty of 
not worshipping the gods the State worshipped but introducing other new divinities, and further 
that he was guilty of corrupting the young by teaching them accordingly. 

Without further troubling ourselves with the insoluble question of the relation of the Platonic 
Socrates to the real man, let us see what Plato makes him say in answer to this charge. 

Socrates begins by accusing his prosecutors of eloquence, and rebutting the charge of eloquence 
as applied to himself The only eloquence of which he is capable, he says, is that of truth. And 
they must not be angry with him if he speaks in his accustomed manner, not in "a set oration, 
duly ornamented with words and phrases." ^_He is over seventy, and has never appeared in a 
court of law until now; they must therefore pardon his un- forensic way of speaking. 

He goes on to say that, in addition to his formal accusers, he has a large body of informal 
accusers, who, ever since the judges were children, have gone about "telling of one Socrates, a 
wise man, who speculated about the heavens above, and searched into the earth beneath, and 
made the worse appear the better cause." Such men, he says, are supposed not to believe in the 
existence of the gods. This old accusation by public opinion is more dangerous than the formal 


* In quotations from Plato. I have used Jowett' s translation. 


- 85 - 


indictment, the more so as he does not know who are the men from whom it comes, except in 
the case of Aristophanes. ^_He points out, in reply to these older grounds of hostility, that he is 
not a man of science— "I have nothing to do with physical speculations"— that he is not a teacher, 
and does not take money for teaching. He goes on to make fun of the Sophists, and to disclaim 
the knowledge that they profess to have. What, then, is "the reason why I am called wise and 
have such an evil fame?" 

The oracle of Delphi, it appears, was once asked if there were any man wiser than Socrates, and 
replied that there was not. Socrates professes to have been completely puzzled, since he knew 
nothing, and yet a god cannot he. He therefore went about among men reputed wise, to see 
whether he could convict the god of error. First he went to a politician, who "was thought wise 
by many, and still wiser by himself." He soon found that the man was not wise, and explained 
this to him, kindly but firmly, "and the consequence was that he hated me." He then went to the 
poets, and asked them to explain passages in their writings, but they were unable to do so. 

"Then I knew that not by wisdom do poets write poetry, but by a sort of genius and inspiration." 
Then he went to the artisans, but found them equally disappointing. In the process, he says, he 
made many dangerous enemies. Finally he concluded that "God only is wise; and by his answer 
he intends to show that the wisdom of men is worth little or nothing; he is not speaking of 
Socrates, he is only using my name by way of illustration, as if he said, He, O men, is the 
wisest, who, like Socrates, knows that his wisdom is in truth worth nothing." This business of 
showing up pretenders to wisdom takes up all his time, and has left him in utter poverty, but he 
feels it a duty to vindicate the oracle. 

Young men of the richer classes, he says, having not much to do, enjoy listening to him 
exposing people, and proceed to do likewise, thus increasing the number of his enemies. "For 
they do not like to confess that their pretence of knowledge has been detected." 

So much for the first class of accusers. 

Socrates now proceeds to examine his prosecutor Meletus, "that good man and true lover of his 
country, as he calls himself." He asks 


* In The Clouds, Socrates is represented as denying the existence of Zeus. 


- 86 - 


who are the people who improve the young. Meletus first mentions the judges; then, under 
pressure, is driven, step by step, to say that every Athenian except Socrates improves the young; 
whereupon Socrates congratulates the city on its good fortune. Next, he points out that good 
men are better to live among than bad men, and therefore he cannot be so foolish as to corrupt 
his fellow-citizens intentionally, but if unintentionally, then Meletus should instruct him, not 
prosecute him. 

The indictment had said that Socrates not only denied the gods of the State, but introduced 
other gods of his own; Meletus, however, says that Socrates is a complete atheist, and adds: "He 
says that the sun is stone and the moon earth." Socrates replies that Meletus seems to think he is 
prosecuting Anaxagoras, whose views may be heard in the theatre for one drachma (presumably 
in the plays of Euripides). Socrates of course points out that this new accusation of complete 
atheism contradicts the indictment, and then passes on to more general considerations. 

The rest of the Apology is essentially religious in tone. He has been a soldier, and has remained 
at his post, as he was ordered to do. Now "God orders me to fulfil the philosopher's mission of 
searching into myself and other men," and it would be as shameful to desert his post now as in 
time of battle. Fear of death is not wisdom, since no one knows whether death may not be the 
greater good. If he were offered his life on condition of ceasing to speculate as he has done 
hitherto, he would reply: "Men of Athens, I honour and love you; but I shall obey God rather 
than you, jyand while I have life and strength I shall never cease from the practice and teaching 
of philosophy, exhorting any one whom I meet. . . . For know that this is the command of God; 
and I believe that no greater good has ever happened in the State than my service to the God." 
He goes on: 

I have something more to say, at which you may be inclined to cry out; but I believe that to hear 
me will be good for you, and therefore I beg that you will not cry out. I would have you know, 
that if you kill such a one as I am, you will injure yourselves more than you will injure me. 
Nothing will injure me, not Meletus nor yet Anytus— they cannot, for a bad man is not permitted 
to injure a better than himself. I do not deny that 


* Cf. Acts, V, 29. 


- 87 - 


Anytus may perhaps kill him, or drive him into exile, or deprive him of civil rights; and he may 
imagine, and others may imagine, that he is inflicting a great injury upon him: but there I do not 
agree. For the evil of doing as he is doing— the evil of unjustly taking away the life of another— is 
greater far. 

It is for the sake of his judges, he says, not for his own sake, that he is pleading. He is a gad-fly, 
given to the state by God, and it will not be easy to find another like him. "I dare say you may feel 
out of temper (like a person who is suddenly awakened from sleep), and you think that you might 
easily strike me dead as Anytus advises, and then you would sleep on for the remainder of your 
lives, unless God in his care of you sent you another gad-fly." 

Why has he only gone about in private, and not given advice on public affairs? "You have heard 
me speak at sundry times and in diverse places of an oracle or sign which comes to me, and is the 
divinity which Meletus ridicules in the indictment. This sign, which is a kind of voice, first began 
to come to me when I was a child; it always forbids but never commands me to do anything which 
I am going to do. This is what deters me from being a politician." He goes on to say that in politics 
no honest man can live long. He gives two instances in which he was unavoidably mixed up in 
public affairs: in the first, he resisted the democracy; in the second, the Thirty Tyrants, in each 
case when the authorities were acting illegally. 

He points out that among those present are many former pupils of his, and fathers and brothers of 
pupils; not one of these has been produced by the prosecution to testify that he corrupts the young. 
(This is almost the only argument in the Apology that a lawyer for the defence would sanction.) 

He refuses to follow the custom of producing his weeping children in court, to soften the hearts of 
the judges; such scenes, he says, make the accused and the city alike ridiculous. It is his business 
to convince the judges, not to ask a favour of them. 

After the verdict, and the rejection of the alternative penalty of thirty minae (in connection with 
which Socrates names Plato as one among his sureties, and present in court), he makes one final 
speech. 

And now, O men who have condemned me, I would fain prophesy to you; for I am about to die, 
and in the hour of death 


- 88 - 



men are gifted with prophetic power. And I prophesy to you, who are my murderers, that 
immediately after my departure punishment far heavier than you have inflicted on me will surely 
await you. ... If you think that by killing men you can prevent some one from censuring your evil 
lives, you are mistaken; that is not a way of escape which is either possible or honourable; the 
easiest and the noblest way is not to be disabling others, but to be improving yourselves. 

He then turns to those of his judges who have voted for acquittal, and tells them that, in all that he 
has done that day, his oracle has never opposed him, though on other occasions it has often 
stopped him in the middle of a speech. This, he says, "is an intimation that what has happened to 
me is a good, and that those of us who think death is an evil are in error." For either death is a 
dreamless sleep-which is plainly good— or the soul migrates to another world. And "what would 
not a man give if he might converse with Orpheus and Musaeus and Hesiod and Homer? Nay, if 
this be true, let me die and die again." In the next world, he will converse with others who have 
suffered death unjustly, and, above all, he will continue his search after knowledge. "In another 
world they do not put a man to death for asking questions: assuredly not. For besides being 
happier than we are, they will be immortal, if what is said is true. . . . 

"The hour of departure has arrived, and we go our ways— I to die, and you to live. Which is better 
God only knows." 

The Apology gives a clear picture of a man of a certain type: a man very sure of himself, high- 
minded, indifferent to worldly success, believing that he is guided by a divine voice, and 
persuaded that clear thinking is the most important requisite for right living. Except in this last 
point, he resembles a Christian martyr or a Puritan. In the final passage, where he considers what 
happens after death, it is impossible not to feel that he firmly believes in immortality, and that his 
professed uncertainty is only assumed. He is not troubled, like the Christians, by fears of eternal 
torment: he has no doubt that his life in the next world will be a happy one. In the Phaedo, the 
Platonic Socrates gives reasons for the belief in immortality; whether these were the reasons that 
influenced the historical Socrates, it is impossible to say. 


- 89 - 



There seems hardly any doubt that the historical Socrates claimed to be guided by an oracle or 
daimon. Whether this was analogous to what a Christian would call the voice of conscience, or 
whether it appeared to him as an actual voice, it is impossible to know. Joan of Arc was inspired 
by voices, which are a common fonn of insanity. Socrates was liable to cataleptic trances; at least, 
that seems the natural explanation of such an incident as occurred once when he was on military 
service: 

One morning he was thinking about something which he could not resolve; he would not give it 
up, but continued thinking from early dawn until noon— there he stood fixed in thought; and at 
noon attention was drawn to him, and the rumour ran through the wondering crowd that Socrates 
had been standing and thinking about something ever since the break of day. At last, in the 
evening after supper, some Ionians out of curiosity (I should explain that this occurred not in 
winter but in summer), brought out their mats and slept in the open air that they might watch him 
and see whether he would stand all night. There he stood until the following morning; and with 
the return of light he offered up a prayer to the sun, and went his way ( Symposium, 220). 

This sort of thing, in a lesser degree, was a common occurrence with Socrates. At the beginning of 
the Symposium, Socrates and Aristodemus go together to the banquet, but Socrates drops behind 
in a fit of abstraction. When Aristodemus arrives, Agathon, the host, says "what have you done 
with Socrates?" Aristodemus is astonished to find Socrates not with him; a slave is sent to look 
for him, and finds him in the portico of a neighbouring house. "There he is fixed," says the slave 
on his return, "and when I call to him he will not stir." Those who know him well explain that "he 
has a way of stopping anywhere and losing himself without any reason." They leave him alone, 
and he enters when the feast is half over. 

Every one is agreed that Socrates was very ugly; he had a snub nose and a considerable paunch; he 
was "uglier than all the Silenuses in the Satyric drama" ( Xenophon, Symposium ). He was always 
dressed in shabby old clothes, and went barefoot everywhere. His indifference to heat and cold, 
hunger and thirst, amazed every one. Alcibiades in the Symposium, describing Socrates on 
military service, says: 


- 90 - 



His endurance was simply marvellous when, being cut off from our supplies, we were compelled 
to go without food— on such occasions, which often happen in time of war, he was superior not 
only to me but to everybody: there was no one to be compared to him. . . . His fortitude in 
enduring cold was also surprising. There was a severe frost, for the winter in that region is really 
tremendous, and everybody else either remained indoors, or if they went out had on an amazing 
quantity of clothes, and were well shod, and had their feet swathed in felt and fleeces: in the midst 
of this, Socrates with his bare feet on the ice and in his ordinary dress marched better than the 
other soldiers who had shoes, and they looked daggers at him because he seemed to despise them. 

His mastery over all bodily passions is constantly stressed. He seldom drank wine, but when he 
did, he could out-drink anybody; no one had ever seen him drunk. In love, even under the 
strongest temptations, he remained "Platonic," if Plato is speaking the truth. He was the perfect 
Orphic saint: in the dualism of heavenly soul and earthly body, he had achieved the complete 
mastery of the soul over the body. His indifference to death at the last is the final proof of this 
mastery. At the same time, he is not an orthodox Orphic; it is only the fundamental doctrines that 
he accepts, not the superstitions and ceremonies of purification. 

The Platonic Socrates anticipates both the Stoics and the Cynics. The Stoics held that the supreme 
good is virtue, and that a man cannot be deprived of virtue by outside causes; this doctrine is 
implicit in the contention of Socrates that his judges cannot hann him. The Cynics despised 
worldly goods, and showed their contempt by eschewing the comforts of civilization; this is the 
same point of view that led Socrates to go barefoot and ill-clad. 

It seems fairly certain that the preoccupations of Socrates were ethical rather than scientific. In the 
Apology, as we saw, he says: "I have nothing to do with physical speculations." The earliest of the 
Platonic dialogues, which are generally supposed to be the most Socratic, are mainly occupied 
with the search for definitions of ethical tenns. The Charmides is concerned with the definition of 
temperance or moderation; the Lysis with friendship; the Laches with courage. In all of these, no 
conclusion is arrived at, but Socrates makes it clear 


- 91 - 



that he thinks it important to examine such questions. The Platonic Socrates consistently 
maintains that he knows nothing, and is only wiser than others in knowing that he knows nothing; 
but he does not think knowledge unobtainable. On the contrary, he thinks the search for 
knowledge of the utmost importance. He maintains that no man sins wittingly, and therefore only 
knowledge is needed to make all men perfectly virtuous. 

The close connection between virtue and knowledge is characteristic of Socrates and Plato. To 
some degree, it exists in all Greek thought, as opposed to that of Christianity. In Christian ethics, a 
pure heart is the essential, and is at least as likely to be found among the ignorant as among the 
learned. This difference between Greek and Christian ethics has persisted down to the present day. 

Dialectic, that is to say, the method of seeking knowledge by question and answer, was not 
invented by Socrates. It seems to have been first practised systematically by Zeno, the disciple of 
Parmenides; in Plato's dialogue Parmenides, Zeno subjects Socrates to the same kind of treatment 
to which, elsewhere in Plato, Socrates subjects others. But there is every reason to suppose that 
Socrates practised and developed the method. As we saw, when Socrates is condemned to death 
he reflects happily that in the next world he can go on asking questions for ever, and cannot be put 
to death, as he will be immortal. Certainly, if he practised dialectic in the way described in the 
Apology, the hostility to him is easily explained: all the humbugs in Athens would combine 
against him. 

The dialectic method is suitable for some questions, and unsuitable for others. Perhaps this helped 
to determine the character of Plato's inquiries, which were, for the most part, such as could be 
dealt with in this way. And through Plato's influence, most subsequent philosophy has been 
bounded by the limitations resulting from his method. 

Some matters are obviously unsuitable for treatment in this way-empirical science, for example. It 
is true that Galileo used dialogues to advocate his theories, but that was only in order to overcome 
prejudice— the positive grounds for his discoveries could not be inserted in a dialogue without 
great artificiality. Socrates, in Plato's works, always pretends that he is only eliciting knowledge 
already possessed by the man he is questioning; on this ground, he compares himself to a midwife. 
When, in the Phaedo and the Meno, he applies his 


- 92 - 



method to geometrical problems, he has to ask leading questions which any judge would disallow. 
The method is in hannony with the doctrine of reminiscence, according to which we leam by 
remembering what we knew in a fonner existence. As against this view, consider any discovery 
that has been made by means of the microscope, say the spread of diseases by bacteria; it can 
hardly be maintained that such knowledge can be elicited from a previously ignorant person by the 
method of question and answer. 

The matters that are suitable for treatment by the Socratic method are those as to which we have 
already enough knowledge to come to a right conclusion, but have failed, through confusion of 
thought or lack of analysis, to make the best logical use of what we know. A question such as 
"what is justice?" is eminently suited for discussion in a Platonic dialogue. We all freely use the 
words "just" and "unjust," and, by examining the ways in which we use them, we can arrive 
inductively at the definition that will best suit with usage. All that is needed is knowledge of how 
the words in question are used. But when our inquiry is concluded, we have made only a linguistic 
discovery, not a discovery in ethics. 

We can, however, apply the method profitably to a somewhat larger class of cases. Wherever what 
is being debated is logical rather than factual, discussion is a good method of eliciting truth. 
Suppose some one maintains, for example, that democracy is good, but persons holding certain 
opinions should not be allowed to vote, we may convict him of inconsistency, and prove to him 
that at least one of his two assertions must be more or less erroneous. Logical errors are, I think, of 
greater practical importance than many people believe; they enable their perpetrators to hold the 
comfortable opinion on every subject in turn. Any logically coherent body of doctrine is sure to be 
in part painful and contrary to current prejudices. The dialectic method —or, more generally, the 
habit of unfettered discussion— tends to promote logical consistency, and is in this way useful. But 
it is quite unavailing when the object is to discover new facts. Perhaps "philosophy" might be 
defined as the sum-total of those inquiries that can be pursued by Plato's methods. But if this 
definition is appropriate, that is because of Plato's influence upon subsequent philosophers. 


- 93 - 



CHAPTER XII The Influence of Sparta 


TO understand Plato, and indeed many later philosophers, it is necessary to know something of 
Sparta. Sparta had a double effect on Greek thought: through the reality, and through the myth. 
Each is important. The reality enabled the Spartans to defeat Athens in war; the myth influenced 
Plato's political theory, and that of countless subsequent writers. The myth, fully developed, is 
to be found in Plutarch Life of Lycurgus; the ideals that it favours have had a great part in 
framing the doctrines of Rousseau, Nietzsche, and National Socialism. ^_The myth is of even 
more importance, historically, than the reality; nevertheless, we will begin with the latter. For 
the reality was the source of the myth. 

Laconia, or Lacedaemon, of which Sparta was the capital, occupied the south-east of the 
Peloponnesus. The Spartans, who were the ruling race, had conquered the country at the time of 
the Dorian invasion from the north, and had reduced the population that they found there to the 
condition of serfs. These serfs were called helots. In historical times, all the land belonged to 
the Spartans, who, however, were forbidden by law and custom to cultivate it themselves, both 
on the ground that such labour was degrading, and in order that they might always be free for 
military service. The serfs were not bought and sold, but remained attached to the land, which 
was divided into lots, one or more for each adult male Spartan. These lots, like the helots, could 
not be bought or sold, and passed, by law, from father to son. (They could, however, be 
bequeathed.) The landowner received from the helot who cultivated the lot seventy medimni 
(about 105 bushels) of grain for himself, twelve for his wife, and a stated 


* Not to mention Dr. Thomas Arnold and the English public schools. 


- 94 - 


portion of wine and fruit annually. ^Anything beyond this amount was the property of the 
helot. The helots were Greeks, like the Spartans, and bitterly resented their servile condition. 
When they could, they rebelled. The Spartans had a body of secret police to deal with this 
danger, but to supplement this precaution they had another: once a year, they declared war on 
the helots, so that their young men could kill any who seemed insubordinate without incurring 
the legal guilt of homicide. Helots could be emancipated by the state, but not by their masters; 
they were emancipated, rather rarely, for exceptional bravery in battle. 

At some time during the eighth century B.C. the Spartans conquered the neighbouring country 
of Messenia, and reduced most of its inhabitants to the condition of helots. There had been a 
lack of Lebensraum in Sparta, but the new territory, for a time, removed this source of 
discontent. 

Lots were for the common run of Spartans; the aristocracy had estates of their own, whereas the 
lots were portions of common land assigned by the state. 

The free inhabitants of other parts of Laconia, called "perioeci," had no share of political power. 

The sole business of a Spartan citizen was war, to which he was trained from birth. Sickly 
children were exposed after inspection by the heads of the tribe; only those judged vigorous 
were allowed to be reared. Up to the age of twenty, all the boys were trained in one big school; 
the purpose of the training was to make them hardy, indifferent to pain, and submissive to 
discipline. There was no nonsense about cultural or scientific education; the sole aim was to 
produce good soldiers, wholly devoted to the state. 

At the age of twenty, actual military service began. Marriage was pennitted to any one over the 
age of twenty, but until the age of thirty a man had to live in the "men's house," and had to 
manage his marriage as if it were an illicit and secret affair. After thirty, he was a full-fledged 
citizen. Every citizen belonged to a mess, and dined with the other members; he had to make a 
contribution in kind from the produce of his lot. It was the theory of the state that no Spartan 
citizen should be destitute, and none should be rich. Each was ex- 


* Bury, History of Greece, I, p. 138. It seems that Spartan men ate nearly six times as much 
as their wives. 


- 95 - 


pected to live on the produce of his lot, which he could not alienate except by free gift. None was 
allowed to own gold or silver, and the money was made of iron. Spartan simplicity became 
proverbial. 

The position of women in Sparta was peculiar. They were not secluded, like respectable women 
elsewhere in Greece. Girls went through the same physical training as was given to boys; what is 
more remarkable, boys and girls did their gymnastics together, all being naked. It was desired (I 
quote Plutarch Lycurgus in North's translation): 

that the maidens should harden their bodies with exercise of running, wrestling, throw the bar, and 
casting the dart, to the end that the fruit wherewith they might be afterwards conceived, taking 
nourishment of a strong and lusty body, should shoot out and spread the better: and that they by 
gathering strength thus by exercises, should more easily away with the pains of child bearing. . . . 
And though the maidens did show themselves thus naked openly, yet was there no dishonesty seen 
nor offered, but all this sport was full of play and toys, without any youthful part or wantonness. 

Men who would not marry were made "infamous by law," and compelled, even in the coldest 
weather, to walk up and down naked outside the place where the young people were doing their 
exercises and dances. 

Women were not allowed to exhibit any emotion not profitable to the State. They might display 
contempt for a coward, and would be praised if he were their son; but they might not show grief if 
their new-born child was condemned to death as a weakling, or if their sons were killed in battle. 
They were considered, by other Greeks, exceptionally chaste; at the same time, a childless married 
woman would raise no objection if the state ordered her to find out whether some other man 
would be more successful than her husband in begetting citizens. Children were encouraged by 
legislation. According to Aristotle, the father of three sons was exempt from military service, and 
the father of four from all the burdens of the state. 

The constitution of Sparta was complicated. There were two kings, belonging to two different 
families, and succeeding by heredity. One or other of the kings commanded army in time of war, 
but in time of peace their powers were limited. At communal feasts they 


- 96 - 



got twice as much to eat as any one else, and there was general mourning when one of them 
died. They were members of the Council of Elders, a body consisting of thirty men (including 
the kings); the other twenty-eight must be over sixty, and were chosen for life by the whole 
body of the citizens, but only from aristocratic families. The Council tried criminal cases, and 
prepared matters which were to come before the Assembly. This body (the Assembly) consisted 
of all the citizens; it could not initiate anything, but could vote yes or no to any proposal 
brought before it. No law could be enacted without its consent. But its consent, though 
necessary, was not sufficient; the elders and magistrates must proclaim the decision before it 
became valid. 

In addition to the kings, the Council of Elders, and the Assembly, there was a fourth branch of 
the government, peculiar to Sparta. This was the five ephors. These were chosen out of the 
whole body of the citizens, by a method which Aristotle says was "too childish," and which 
Bury says was virtually by lot. They were a "democratic" element in the constitution, * 
apparently intended to balance the kings. Every month the kings swore to uphold the 
constitution, and the ephors then swore to uphold the kings so long as they remained true to 
their oath. When either king went on a warlike expedition, two ephors accompanied him to 
watch over his behaviour. The ephors were the supreme civil court, but over the kings they had 
criminal jurisdiction. 

The Spartan constitution was supposed, in later antiquity, to have been due to a legislator 
named Lycurgus, who was said to have promulgated his laws in 885 B.C. In fact, the Spartan 
system grew up gradually, and Lycurgus was a mythical person, originally a god. His name 
meant "wolf-repeller," and his origin was Arcadian. 

Sparta aroused among the other Greeks an admiration which is to us somewhat surprising. 
Originally, it had been much less different from other Greek cities than it became later; in early 
days it produced poets and artists as good as those elsewhere. But about the seventh century 
B.C., or perhaps even later, its constitution (falsely attributed to Lycurgus) crystallized into the 
form we have been considering; 


* In speaking of "democratic" elements in the Spartan constitution, one must of course 
remember that the citizens as a whole were a ruling class fiercely tyrannizing over the 
helots, and allowing no power to the perioeci. 


- 97 - 


everything else was sacrificed to success in war, and Sparta ceased to have any part whatever in 
what Greece contributed to the civilization of the world. To us, the Spartan state appears as a 
model, in miniature, of the state that the Nazis would establish if victorious. To the Greeks it 
seemed otherwise. As Bury says: 

A stranger from Athens or Miletus in the fifth century visiting the straggling villages which 
formed her unwalled unpretentious city must have had a feeling of being transported into an age 
long past, when men were braver, better and simpler, unspoiled by wealth, undisturbed by 
ideas. To a philosopher, like Plato, speculating in political science, the Spartan State seemed the 
nearest approach to the ideal. The ordinary Greek looked upon it as a structure of severe and 
simple beauty, a Dorian city stately as a Dorian temple, far nobler than his own abode but not so 
comfortable to dwell in. 

One reason for the admiration felt for Sparta by other Greeks was its stability. All other Greek 
cities had revolutions, but the Spartan constitution remained unchanged for centuries, except for 
a gradual increase in the powers of the ephors, which occurred by legal means, without 
violence. 

It cannot be denied that, for a long period, the Spartans were successful in their main purpose, 
the creation of a race of invincible warriors. The battle of Thermopylae ( 480 B.C.), though 
technically a defeat, is perhaps the best example of their valour. Thermopylae was a narrow 
pass through the mountains, where it was hoped that the Persian army could be held. Three 
hundred Spartans, with auxiliaries, repulsed all frontal attacks. But at last the Persians 
discovered a detour through the hills, and succeeded in attacking the Greeks on both sides at 
once. Every single Spartan was killed at his post. Two men had been absent on sick leave, 
suffering from a disease of the eyes amounting almost to temporary blindness. One of them 
insisted on being led by his helot to the battle, where he perished; the other, Aristodemus, 
decided that he was too ill to fight, and remained absent. When he returned to Sparta, no one 
would speak to him; he was called "the coward Aristodemus." A year later, he wiped out his 
disgrace by dying bravely at the battle of Plataea, where the Spartans were victorious. 


* History of Greece, Vol. I, p. 141. 


- 98 - 


After the war, the Spartans erected a memorial on the battlefield of Thermopylae, saying only: 
"Stranger, tell the Lacedaemonians that we lie here, in obedience to their orders." 

For a long time, the Spartans proved themselves invincible on land. They retained their 
supremacy until the year 371 B.C., when they were defeated by the Thebans at the battle of 
Leuctra. This was the end of their military greatness. 

Apart from war, the reality of Sparta was never quite the same as the theory. Herodotus, who 
lived at its great period, remarks, surprisingly, that no Spartan could resist a bribe. This was in 
spite of the fact that contempt for riches and love of the simple life was one of the main things 
inculcated in Spartan education. We are told that the Spartan women were chaste, yet it 
happened several times that a reputed heir to the kingship was set aside on the ground of not 
being the son of his mother's husband. We are told that the Spartans were inflexibly patriotic, 
yet the king Pausanias, the victor of Plataea, ended as a traitor in the pay of Xerxes. Apart from 
such flagrant matters, the policy of Sparta was always petty and provincial. When Athens 
liberated the Greeks of Asia Minor and the adjacent islands from the Persians, Sparta held 
aloof; so long as the Peloponnesus was deemed safe, the fate of other Greeks was a matter of 
indifference. Every attempt at a confederation of the Hellenic world was defeated by Spartan 
particularism. 

Aristotle, who lived after the downfall of Sparta, gives a very hostile account of its constitution. 
f_What he says is so different from what other people say that it is difficult to believe he is 
speaking of the same place, e.g. "The legislator wanted to make the whole state hardy and 
temperate, and he has carried out his intention in the case of men, but he has neglected the 
women, who live in every sort of intemperance and luxury. The consequence is that in such a 
state wealth is too highly valued, especially if the citizens fall under the dominion of their 
wives, after the manner of most warlike races. . . . Even in regard to courage, which is of no use 
in daily life, and is needed only in war, the influence of the Lacedaemonian women has been 
most mischievous. . . . This license of the Lacedaemonian women existed from the earliest 
times, and was only what might be 


* Politics, Vol. II, 9 ( 1269b-70a). 


- 99 - 


expected. For . . . when Lycurgus, as tradition says, wanted to bring the women under his laws, 
they resisted, and he gave up the attempt." 

He goes on to accuse Spartans of avarice, which he attributes to the unequal distribution of 
property. Although lots cannot be sold, he says, they can be given or bequeathed. Two-fifths of all 
the land, he adds, belongs to women. The consequence is a great diminution in the number of 
citizens: it is said that once there were ten thousand, but at the time of the defeat by Thebes there 
were less than one thousand. 

Aristotle criticizes every point of the Spartan constitution. He says that the ephors are often very 
poor, and therefore easy to bribe; and their power is so great that even kings are compelled to 
court them, so that the constitution has been turned into a democracy. The ephors, we are told, 
have too much licence, and live in a manner contrary to the spirit of the constitution, while the 
strictness in relation to ordinary citizens is so intolerable that they take refuge in the secret illegal 
indulgence of sensual pleasures. 

Aristotle wrote when Sparta was decadent, but on some points he expressly says that the evil he is 
mentioning has existed from early times. His tone is so dry and realistic that it is difficult to 
disbelieve him, and it is in line with all modem experience of the results of excessive severity in 
the laws. But it was not Aristotle's Sparta that persisted in men's imaginations; it was the mythical 
Sparta of Plutarch and the philosophic idealization of Sparta in Plato Republic. Century after 
century, young men read these works, and were fired with the ambition to become Lycurguses or 
philosopher-kings. The resulting union of idealism and love of power has led men astray over and 
over again, and is still doing so in the present day. 

The myth of Sparta, for medieval and modem readers, was mainly fixed by Plutarch. When he 
wrote, Sparta belonged to the romantic past; its great period was as far removed from his time as 
Columbus is from ours. What he says must be treated with great caution by the historian of 
institutions, but by the historian of myth it is of the utmost importance. Greece has influenced the 
world, always, through its effect on men's imaginations, ideals, and hopes, not directly through 
political power. Rome made roads which largely still survive, and laws which are the source of 
many modern legal codes, but it was the armies of Rome that made these things important. The 
Greeks, 


- 100 - 



though admirable fighters, made no conquests, because they expended their military fury mainly 
on each other. It was left to the semibarbarian Alexander to spread Hellenism throughout the 
Near East, and to make Greek the literary language in Egypt and Syria and the inland parts of 
Asia Minor. The Greeks could never have accomplished this task, not for lack of military force, 
but owing to their incapacity for political cohesion. The political vehicles of Hellenism have 
always been non-Hellenic; but it was the Greek genius that so inspired alien nations as to cause 
them to spread the culture of those whom they had conquered. 

What is important to the historian of the world is not the petty wars between Greek cities, or the 
sordid squabbles for party ascendancy, but the memories retained by mankind when the brief 
episode was ended— like the recollection of a brilliant sunrise in the Alps, while the mountaineer 
struggles through an arduous day of wind and snow. These memories, as they gradually faded, 
left in men's minds the images of certain peaks that had shone with peculiar brightness in the 
early light, keeping alive the knowledge that behind the clouds a splendour still survived, and 
might at any moment become manifest. Of these, Plato was the most important in early 
Christianity, Aristotle in the medieval Church; but when, after the Renaissance, men began to 
value political freedom, it was above all to Plutarch that they turned. He influenced profoundly 
the English and French liberals of the eighteenth century, and the founders of the United States; 
he influenced the romantic movement in Germany, and has continued, mainly by indirect 
channels, to influence German thought down to the present day. In some ways his influence was 
good, in some bad; as regards Lycurgus and Sparta, it was bad. What he has to say about 
Lycurgus is important, and I shall give a brief account of it, even at the cost of some repetition. 

Lycurgus— so Plutarch says— having resolved to give laws to Sparta, travelled widely in order to 
study different institutions. He liked the laws of Crete, which were "very straight and severe," * 
but disliked those of Ionia, where there were "superfluities and vanities." In Egypt he learned 
the advantage of separating the soldiers from the rest of the people, and afterwards, having 
returned from his travels, "brought 


* In quoting Plutarch I use North's translation. 


- 101 - 


the practice of it into Sparta: where setting the merchants, artificers, and labourers every one a part 
by themselves, he did establish a noble Commonwealth." He made an equal division of lands 
among all the citizens of Sparta, in order to "banish out of the city all insolvency, envy, 
covetousness, and deliciousness, and also all riches and poverty." He forbade gold and silver 
money, allowing only iron coinage, of so little value that "to lay up thereof the value of ten minas, 
it would have occupied a whole cellar in a house." By this means he banished "all superfluous and 
unprofitable sciences," since there was not enough money to pay their practitioners; and by the 
same law he made all external commerce impossible. Rhetoricians, panders, and jewellers, not 
liking the iron money, avoided Sparta. He next ordained that all the citizens should eat together, 
and all should have the same food. 

Lycurgus, like other reformers, thought the education of children "the chiefest and greatest matter, 
that a reformer of laws should establish"; and like all who aim chiefly at military power, he was 
anxious to keep up the birth rate. The "plays, sports, and dances the maids did naked before young 
men, were provocations to draw and allure the young men to marry: not as persuaded by 
geometrical reasons, as saith Plato, but brought to it by liking, and of very love." The habit of 
treating a marriage, for the first few years, as if it were a clandestine affair, "continued in both 
parties a still burning love, and a new desire of the one to the other"— such, at least, is the opinion 
of Plutarch. He goes on to explain that a man was not thought ill of if, being old and having a 
young wife, he allowed a younger man to have children by her. "It was lawful also for an honest 
man that loved another man’s wife ... to intreat her husband to suffer him to lie with her, and that 
he might also plough in that lusty ground, and cast abroad the seed of well-favoured children." 
There was to be no foolish jealousy, for "Lycurgus did not like that children should be private to 
any men, but that they should be common to the common weal: by which reason he would also, 
that such as should become citizens should not be begotten of every man, but of the most honest 
men only." He goes on to explain that this is the principle that fanners apply to their live-stock. 

When a child was bom, the father brought him before the elders of his family to be examined: if 
he was healthy, he was given back to the father to be reared; if not, he was thrown into a deep pit 
of water. 


- 102 - 



Children, from the first, were subjected to a severe hardening process, in some respects good— for 
example, they were not put in swaddling clothes. At the age of seven, boys were taken away from 
home and put in a boarding school, where they were divided into companies, each under the 
orders of one of their number, chosen for sense and courage. "Touching learning, they had as 
much as served their turn: for the rest of their time they spent in learning how to obey, to away 
with pain, to endure labour, to overcome still in fight." They played naked together most of the 
time; after twelve years old, they wore no coats; they were always "nasty and sluttish," and they 
never bathed except on certain days in the year. They slept on beds of straw, which in winter they 
mixed with thistle. They were taught to steal, and were punished if caught— not for stealing, but 
for stupidity. 

Homosexual love, both male and female, was a recognized custom in Sparta, and had an 
acknowledged part in the education of adolescent boys. A boy's lover suffered credit or discredit 
by the boy's actions; Plutarch states that once, when a boy cried out because he was hurt in 
fighting, his lover was fined for the boy's cowardice. 

There was little liberty at any stage in the life of a Spartan. 

Their discipline and order of life continued still, after they were full grown men. For it was not 
lawful for any man to live as he listed, but they were within their city, as if they had been in a 
camp, where every man knoweth what allowance he hath to live withal, and what business he hath 
else to do in his calling. To be short, they were all of this mind, that they were not bom to serve 
themselves, but to serve their country. . . . One of the best and happiest things which Lycurgus 
ever brought into his city, was the great rest and leisure which he made his citizens to have, only 
forbidding them that they should not profess any vile or base occupation: and they needed not also 
to be careful to get great riches, in a place where goods were nothing profitable nor esteemed. For 
the Helots, which were bond men made by the wars, did till their grounds, and yielded them a 
certain revenue every year. 

Plutarch goes on to tell a story of an Athenian condemned for idleness, upon hearing of which a 
Spartan exclaimed: "Show me the man condemned for living nobly and like a gentleman." 


- 103 - 



Lycurgus ( Plutarch continues) "did accustom his citizens so, that they neither would nor could 
live alone, but were in manner as men incorporated one with another, and were always in 
company together, as the bees be about their master bee." 

Spartans were not allowed to travel, nor were foreigners admitted to Sparta, except on business; 
for it was feared that alien customs would corrupt Lacedaemonian virtue. 

Plutarch relates the law that allowed Spartans to kill helots whenever they felt so disposed, but 
refuses to believe that anything so abominable can have been due to Lycurgus. "For I cannot be 
persuaded, that ever Lycurgus invented, or instituted, so wicked and mischievous an act, as that 
kind of ordinance was: because I imagine his nature was gentle and merciful, by the clemency and 
justice we see he used in all his other doings." Except in this matter, Plutarch has nothing but 
praise for the constitution of Sparta. 

The effect of Sparta on Plato, with whom, at the moment, we shall be specially concerned, will be 
evident from the account of his Utopia, which will occupy the next chapter. 

CHAPTER XIII The Sources of Plato's Opinions 

PLATO and Aristotle were the most influential of all philosophers, ancient, medieval, or modem; 
and of the two, it was Plato who had the greater effect upon subsequent ages. I say this for two 
reasons: first, that Aristotle himself is an outcome of Plato; second, that Christian theology and 
philosophy, at any rate until the thirteenth century, was much more Platonic than Aristotelian. It is 
necessary, therefore, in a history of philosophic thought, to treat Plato, and to a lesser degree 
Aristotle, more fully than any of their predecessors or successors. 

The most important matters in Plato's philosophy are: first, his Utopia, which was the earliest of a 
long series second, his theory of 


- 104 - 



ideas, which was a pioneer attempt to deal with the still unsolved problem of universals; third, his 
arguments in favour of immortality; fourth, his cosmogony; fifth, his conception of knowledge as 
reminiscence rather than perception. But before dealing with any of these topics, I shall say a few 
words about the circumstances of his life and the influences which determined his political and 
philosophical opinions. 

Plato was born in 428-7 B.C., in the early years of the Peloponnesian War. He was a well-to-do 
aristocrat, related to various people who were concerned in the rule of the Thirty Tyrants. He was 
a young man when Athens was defeated, and he could attribute the defeat to democracy, which his 
social position and his family connections were likely to make him despise. He was a pupil of 
Socrates, for whom he had a profound affection and respect; and Socrates was put to death by the 
democracy. It is not, therefore, surprising that he should turn to Sparta for an adumbration of his 
ideal commonwealth. Plato possessed the art to dress up illiberal suggestions in such a way that 
they deceived future ages, which admired the Republic without ever becoming aware of what was 
involved in its proposals. It has always been correct to praise Plato, but not to understand him. 

This is the common fate of great men. My object is the opposite. I wish to understand him, but to 
treat him with as little reverence as if he were a contemporary English or American advocate of 
totalitarianism. 

The purely philosophical influences on Plato were also such as to predispose him in favour of 
Sparta. These influences, speaking broadly, were: Pythagoras, Parmenides, Heraclitus, and 
Socrates. 

From Pythagoras (whether by way of Socrates or not) Plato derived the Orphic elements in his 
philosophy: the religious trend, the belief in immortality, the other-worldliness, the priestly tone, 
and all that is involved in the simile of the cave; also his respect for mathematics, and his intimate 
intermingling of intellect and mysticism. 

From Parmenides he derived the belief that reality is eternal and timeless, and that, on logical 
grounds, all change must be illusory. 

From Heraclitus he derived the negative doctrine that there is nothing permanent in the sensible 
world. This, combined with the doctrine of Parmenides, led to the conclusion that knowledge is 
not 


- 105 - 



to be derived from the senses, but is only to be achieved by the intellect. This, in turn fitted in well 
with Pythagoreanism. 

From Socrates he probably leamt his preoccupation with ethical problems, and his tendency to 
seek teleological rather than mechanical explanations of the world. "The Good" dominated his 
thought more than that of the pre-Socratics, and it is difficult not to attribute this fact to the 
influence of Socrates. 

How is all this connected with authoritarianism in politics? 

In the first place: Goodness and Reality being timeless, the best state will be the one which most 
nearly copies the heavenly model, by having a minimum of change and a maximum of static 
perfection, and its rulers should be those who best understand the eternal Good. 

In the second place: Plato, like all mystics, has, in his beliefs, a core of certainty which is 
essentially incommunicable except by a way of life. The Pythagoreans had endeavoured to set up 
a rule of the initiate, and this is, at bottom, what Plato desires. If a man is to be a good statesman, 
he must know the Good; this he can only do by a combination of intellectual and moral discipline. 
If those who have not gone through this discipline are allowed a share in the government, they 
will inevitably corrupt k. 

In the third place: much education is needed to make a good ruler on Plato's principles. It seems to 
us unwise to have insisted on teaching geometry to the younger Dionysius, tyrant of Syracuse, in 
order to make him a good king, but from Plato's point of view it was essential. He was sufficiently 
Pythagorean to think that without mathematics no true wisdom is possible. This view implies an 
oligarchy. 

In the fourth place: Plato, in common with most Greek philosophers, took the view that leisure is 
essential to wisdom, which will therefore not be found among those who have to work for their 
living, but only among those who have independent means, or who are relieved by the state from 
anxieties as to their subsistence. This point of view is essentially aristocratic. 

Two general questions arise in confronting Plato with modem ideas. The first is: Is there such a 
thing as "wisdom"? The second is: Granted that there is such a thing, can any constitution be 
devised that will give it political power? 

"Wisdom," in the sense supposed, would not be any kind of specialized skill, such as is possessed 
by the shoemaker or the physician 


- 106 - 



or the military tactician. It must be something more generalized than this, since its possession is 
supposed to make a man capable of governing wisely. I think Plato would have said that it 
consists in knowledge of the good, and would have supplemented this definition with the Socratic 
doctrine that no man sins wittingly, from which it follows that whoever kn ows what is good does 
what is right. To us, such a view seems remote from reality. We should more naturally say that 
there are divergent interests, and that the statesman should arrive at the best available 
compromise. The members of a class or a nation may have a common interest, but it will usually 
conflict with the interests of other classes or other nations. There are, no doubt, some interests of 
mankind as a whole, but they do not suffice to detennine political action. Perhaps they will do so 
at some future date, but certainly not so long as there are many sovereign States. And even then 
the most difficult part of the pursuit of the general interest would consist in arriving at 
compromises among mutually hostile special interests. 

But even if we suppose that there is such a thing as "wisdom," is there any fonn of constitution 
which will give the government to the wise? It is clear that majorities, like general councils, may 
err, and in fact have erred. Aristocracies are not always wise; kings are often foolish; Popes, in 
spite of infallibility, have committed grievous errors. Would anybody advocate entrusting the 
government to university graduates, or even to doctors of divinity? Or to men who, having been 
born poor, have made great fortunes? It is clear that no legally definable selection of citizens is 
likely to be wiser, in practice, than the whole body. 

It might be suggested that men could be given political wisdom by a suitable training. But the 
question would arise: what is a suitable training? And this would turn out to be a party question. 

The problem of finding a collection of "wise" men and leaving the government to them is thus an 
insoluble one. That is the ultimate reason for democracy. 


- 107 - 



CHAPTER XIV Plato's Utopia 


PLATO'S most important dialogue, the Republic, consists, broadly, of three parts. The first (to 
near the end of Book V) consists in the construction of an ideal commonwealth; it is the earliest of 
Utopias. 

One of the conclusions arrived at is that the rulers must be philosophers. Books VI and VII are 
concerned to define the word "philosopher." This discussion constitutes the second section. 

The third section consists of a discussion of various kinds of actual constitutions and of their 
merits and defects. 

The nominal purpose of the Republic is to define "justice." But at an early stage it is decided that, 
since everything is easier to see in the large than in the small, it will be better to inquire what 
makes a just state than what makes a just individual. And since justice must be among the 
attributes of the best imaginable State, such a State is first delineated, and then it is decided which 
of its perfections is to be called "justice." 

Let us first describe Plato's Utopia in its broad outlines, and then consider points that arise by the 
way. 

Plato begins by deciding that the citizens are to be divided into three classes: the common people, 
the soldiers, and the guardians. The last, alone, are to have political power. There are to be much 
fewer of them than of the other two classes. In the first instance, it seems, they are to be chosen by 
the legislator; after that, they will usually succeed by heredity, but in exceptional cases a 
promising child may be promoted from one of the inferior classes, while among the children of 
guardians a child or young man who is unsatisfactory may be degraded. 

The main problem, as Plato perceives, is to insure that the guardians shall carry out the intentions 
of the legislator. For this purpose he has 


- 108 - 



various proposals, educational, economic, biological, and religious. It is not always clear how far 
these proposals apply to other classes than the guardians; it is clear that some of them apply to the 
soldiers, but in the main Plato is concerned only with the guardians, who are to be a class apart, 
like the Jesuits in old Paraguay, the ecclesiastics in the States of the Church until 1870, and the 
Communist Party in the U.S.S.R. at the present day. 

The first thing to consider is education. This is divided into two parts, music and gymnastics. Each 
has a wider meaning than at present: "music" means everything that is in the province of the 
muses, and "gymnastics" means everything concerned with physical training and fitness. "Music" 
is almost as wide as what we should call "culture," and "gymnastics" is somewhat wider than what 
we call "athletics." 

Culture is to be devoted to making men gentlemen, in the sense which, largely owing to Plato, is 
familiar in England. The Athens of his day was, in one respect, analogous to England in the 
nineteenth century: there was in each an aristocracy enjoying wealth and social prestige, but 
having no monopoly of political power; and in each the aristocracy had to secure as much power 
as it could by means of impressive behaviour. In Plato's Utopia, however, the aristocracy rules 
unchecked. 

Gravity, decorum, and courage seem to be the qualities mainly to be cultivated in education. There 
is to be a rigid censorship, from very early years, over the literature to which the young have 
access and the music they are allowed to hear. Mothers and nurses are to tell their children only 
authorized stories. Homer and Hesiod are not to be allowed, for a number of reasons. First, they 
represent the gods as behaving badly on occasion, which is unedifying; the young must be taught 
that evils never come from the gods, for God is not the author of all things, but only of good 
things. Second, there are things in Homer and Hesiod which are calculated to make their readers 
fear death, whereas everything ought to be done in education to make young people willing to die 
in battle. Our boys must be taught to consider slavery worse than death, and therefore they must 
have no stories of good men weeping and wailing, even for the death of friends. Third, decorum 
demands that there should never be loud laughter, and yet Homer speaks of "inextinguishable 
laughter 


- 109 - 



among the blessed gods." How is a schoolmaster to reprove mirth effectively, if boys can quote 
this passage? Fourth, there are passages in Homer praising rich feasts, and others describing the 
lusts of the gods; such passages discourage temperance. ( Dean Inge, a true Platonist, objected to a 
line in a well- kn own hymn: "The shout of them that triumph, the song of them that feast," which 
occurs in a description of the joys of heaven.) Then there must be no stories in which the wicked 
are happy or the good unhappy; the moral effect on tender minds might be most unfortunate. On 
all these counts, the poets are to be condemned. 

Plato passes on to a curious argument about the drama. The good man, he says, ought to be 
unwilling to imitate a bad man; now most plays contain villains; therefore the dramatist, and the 
actor who plays the villain’s part, have to imitate people guilty of various crimes. Not only 
criminals, but women, slaves, and inferiors generally, ought not to be imitated by superior men. 

(In Greece, as in Elizabethan England, women's parts were acted by men.) Plays, therefore, if 
pennissible at all, must contain no characters except faultless male heroes of good birth. The 
impossibility of this is so evident that Plato decides to banish all dramatists from his city: 

When any of these pantomimic gentlemen, who are so clever that they can imitate anything, 
comes to us, and makes a proposal to exhibit himself and his poetry, we will fall down and 
worship him as a sweet and holy and wonderful being; but we must also inform him that in our 
State such as he are not permitted to exist; the law will not allow them. And so when we have 
anointed him with myrrh, and set a garland of wool upon his head, we shall, send him away to 
another city. 

Next we come to the censorship of music (in the modern sense). The Lydian and Ionian hannonies 
are to be forbidden, the first because it expresses sorrow, the second because it is relaxed. Only 
the Dorian (for courage) and the Phrygian (for temperance) are to be allowed. Permissible rhythms 
must be simple, and such as are expressive of a courageous and hannonious life. 

The training of the body is to be very austere. No one is to eat fish, or meat cooked otherwise than 
roasted, and there must be no sauces or confectionery. People brought up on his regimen, he says, 
will have no need of doctors. 


- 110 - 



Up to a certain age, the young are to see no ugliness or vice. But at a suitable moment, they 
must be exposed to "enchantments," both in the shape of terrors that must not terrify, and of bad 
pleasures that must not seduce the will. Only after they have withstood these tests will they be 
judged fit to be guardians. 

Young boys, before they are grown up, should see war, though they should not themselves 
fight. 

As for economics: Plato proposes a thoroughgoing communism for the guardians, and (I think) 
also for the soldiers, though this is not very clear. The guardians are to have small houses and 
simple food; they are to live as in a camp, dining together in companies; they are to have no 
private property beyond what is absolutely necessary. Gold and silver are to be forbidden. 
Though not rich, there is no reason why they should not be happy; but the purpose of the city is 
the good of the whole, not the happiness of one class. Both wealth and poverty are harmful, and 
in Plato's city neither will exist. There is a curious argument about war, that it will be easy to 
purchase allies, since our city will not want any share in the spoils of victory. 

With feigned unwillingness, the Platonic Socrates proceeds to apply his communism to the 
family. Friends, he says, should have all things in common, including women and children. He 
admits that this presents difficulties, but thinks them not insuperable. First of all, girls are to 
have exactly the same education as boys, learning music, gymnastics, and the art of war along 
with the boys. Women are to have complete equality with men in all respects. "The same 
education which makes a man a good guardian will make a woman a good guardian; for their 
original nature is the same." No doubt there are differences between men and women, but they 
have nothing to do with politics. Some women are philosophic, and suitable as guardians; some 
are warlike, and could make good soldiers. 

The legislator, having selected the guardians, some men and some women, will ordain that they 
shall all share common houses and common meals. Marriage, as we know it, will be radically 
transformed. fyAt certain festivals, brides and bridegrooms, in such numbers as are required to 
keep the population constant, will be brought together, by lot, as they will be taught to believe; 
but in fact the 


* "These women shall be, without exception, the common wives of these men, and no one 
shall have a wife of his own." 


-Ill- 


rulers of the city will manipulate the lots on eugenic principles. They will arrange that the best 
sires shall have the most children. All children will be taken away from their parents at birth, 
and great care will be taken that no parents shall know who are their children, and no children 
shall know who are their parents. Deformed children, and children of inferior parents, "will be 
put away in some mysterious u nkn own place, as they ought to be." Children arising from unions 
not sanctioned by the State are to be considered illegitimate. Mothers are to be between twenty 
and forty, fathers between twenty-five and fifty-five. Outside these ages, intercourse is to be 
free, but abortion or infanticide is to be compulsory. In the "marriages" arranged by the State, 
the people concerned have no voice; they are to be actuated by the thought of their duty to the 
State, not by any of those common emotions that the banished poets used to celebrate. 

Since no one kn ows who his parents are, he is to call every one "father" whose age is such that 
he might be his father, and similarly as regards "mother" and "brother" and "sister." (This sort 
of thing happens among some savages, and used to puzzle missionaries.) There is to be no 
marriage between a "father" and "daughter" or "mother" and "son"; in general, but not 
absolutely, marriages of "brother" and "sister" are to be prevented. (I thi nk if Plato had thought 
this out more carefully he would have found that he had prohibited all marriages, except the 
"brother-sister" marriages which he regards as rare exceptions.) 

It is supposed that the sentiments at present attached to the words "father," "mother," "son," and 
"daughter" will still attach to them under Plato's new arrangements; a young man, for instance, 
will not strike an old man, because he might be striking his father. 

The advantage sought is, of course, to minimize private possessive emotions, and so remove 
obstacles to the domination of public spirit, as well as to acquiescence in the absence of private 
property. It was largely motives of a similar kind that led to the celibacy of the clergy. 

I come last to the theological aspect of the system. I am not thinking of the accepted Greek 
gods, but of certain myths which the government is to inculcate. Lying, Plato says explicity, is 
to be a prerogative 


* See Henry C. Lea, A History of Sacerdotal Celibacy. 


- 112 - 


of the government, just as giving medicine is of physicians. The government, as we have already 
seen, is to deceive people in pretending to arrange marriages by lot, but this is not a religious 
matter. 

There is to be "one royal lie," which, Plato hopes, may deceive the rulers, but will at any rate 
deceive the rest of the city. This "lie" is set forth in considerable detail. The most important part of 
it is the dogma that God has created men of three kinds, the best made of gold, the second best of 
silver, and the common herd of brass and iron. Those made of gold are fit to be guardians; those 
made of silver should be soldiers; the others should do the manual work. Usually, but by no means 
always, children will belong to the same grade as their parents; when they do not, they must be 
promoted or degraded accordingly. It is thought hardly possible to make the present generation 
believe this myth, but the next, and all subsequent generations, can be so educated as not to doubt 
it. 

Plato is fight in thinking that belief in this myth could be generated in two generations. The 
Japanese have been taught that the Mikado is descended from the sun-goddess, and that Japan was 
created earlier than the rest of the world. Any university professor, who, even in a learned work, 
throws doubt on these dogmas, is dismissed for unJapanese activities. What Plato does not seem 
to realize is that the compulsory acceptance of such myths is incompatible with philosophy, and 
involves a kind of education which stunts intelligence. 

The definition of "justice," which is the nominal goal of the whole discussion, is reached in Book 
IV. It consists, we are told, in everybody doing his own work and not being a busybody: the city is 
just when trader, auxiliary, and guardian, each does his own job without interfering with that of 
other classes. 

That everybody should mind his own business is no doubt an admirable precept, but it hardly 
corresponds to what a modem would naturally call "justice." The Greek word so translated 
corresponded to a concept which was very important in Greek thought, but for which we have no 
exact equivalent. It is worth while to recall what Anaximander said: 

Into that from which things take their rise they pass away once more, as is ordained; for they make 
reparation and satisfaction to, one another for their injustice according to the appointed time. 


- 113 - 



Before philosophy began, the Greeks had a theory or feeling about the universe, which may be 
called religious or ethical. According to this theory, every person and every thing has his or its 
appointed place and appointed function. This does not depend upon the fiat of Zeus, for Zeus 
himself is subject to the same kind of law as governs others. The theory is connected with the idea 
of fate or necessity. It applies emphatically to the heavenly bodies. But where there is vigour, there 
is a tendency to overstep just bounds; hence arises strife. Some kind of impersonal super- 
Olympian law punishes hubris, and restores the eternal order which the aggressor sought to 
violate. This whole outlook, originally, perhaps, scarcely conscious, passed over into philosophy; 
it is to be found alike in cosmologies of strife, such as those of Heraclitus and Empedocles, and in 
monistic doctrines such as that of Parmenides. It is the source of the belief both in natural and in 
human law, and it clearly underlies Plato's conception of justice. 

The word "justice," as still used in the law, is more similar to Plato's conception than it is as used 
in political speculation. Under the influence of democratic theory, we have come to associate 
justice with equality, while for Plato it has no such implication. "Justice," in the sense in which it 
is almost synonymous with "law"— as when we speak of "courts of justice"— is concerned mainly 
with property rights, which have nothing to do with equality. The first suggested definition of 
"justice," at the beginning of the Republic, is that it consists in paying debts. This definition is 
soon abandoned as inadequate, but something of it remains at the end. 

There are several points to be noted about Plato's definition. First, it makes it possible to have 
inequalities of power and privilege without injustice. The guardians are to have all the power, 
because they are the wisest members of the community; injustice would only occur, on Plato's 
definition, if there were men in the other classes who were wiser than some of the guardians. That 
is why Plato provides for promotion and degradation of citizens, although he thinks that the 
double advantage of birth and education will, in most cases, make the children of guardians 
superior to the children of others. If there were a more exact science of government, and more 
certainty of men following its precepts, there would be much to be said for Plato's system. No one 
thinks it unjust to put the best men into a 


- 114 - 



football team, although they acquire thereby a great superiority. If football were managed as 
democratically as the Athenian government, the students to play for their university would be 
chosen by lot. But in matters of government it is difficult to know who has the most skill, and very 
far from certain that a politician will use his skill in the public interest rather than in his own or in 
that of his class or party or creed. 

The next point is that Plato's definition of "justice" presupposes a State organized either on 
traditional lines, or, like his own, so as to realize, in its totality, some ethical ideal. Justice, we are 
told, consists in every man doing his own job. But what is a man's job? In a State which, like 
ancient Egypt or the kingdom of the Incas, remains unchanged generation after generation, a man's 
job is his father's job, and no question arises. But in Plato's State no man has any legal father. His 
job, therefore, must be decided either by his own tastes or by the State's judgement as to his 
aptitudes. The latter is obviously what Plato would desire. But some kinds of work, though highly 
skilled, may be deemed pernicious; Plato takes this view of poetry, and I should take it of the 
work of Napoleon. The purposes of the government, therefore, are essential in detennining what is 
a man’s job. Although all the rulers are to be philosophers, there are to be no innovations: a 
philosopher is to be, for all time, a man who understands and agrees with Plato. 

When we ask: what will Plato's Republic achieve? The answer is rather humdrum. It will achieve 
success in wars against roughly equal populations, and it will secure a livelihood for a certain 
small number of people. It will almost certainly produce no art or science, because of its rigidity; 
in this respect, as in others, it will be like Sparta. In spite of all the fine talk, skill in war and 
enough to eat is all that will be achieved. Plato had lived through famine and defeat in Athens; 
perhaps, subconsciously, he thought the avoidance of these evils the best that statesmanship could 
accomplish. 

A Utopia, if seriously intended, obviously must embody the ideals of its creator. Let us consider, 
for a moment, what we can mean by "ideals." In the first place, they are desired by those who 
believe in them; but they are not desired quite in the same way as a man desires personal comforts, 
such as food and shelter. What makes the difference between "ideal" and an ordinary object of 
desire is that the 


- 115 - 



former is impersonal; it is something having (at least ostensibly) no special reference to the ego of 
the man who feels the desire, and therefore capable, theoretically, of being desired by everybody. 
Thus we might define an "ideal" as something desired, not egocentric, and such that the person 
desiring it wishes that every one else also desired it. I may wish that everybody had enough to eat, 
that everybody felt kindly towards everybody, and so on, and if I wish anything of this kind I shall 
also wish others to wish it. In this way, I can build up what looks like an impersonal ethic, 
although in fact it rests upon the personal basis of my own desires— for the desire remains mine 
even when what is desired has no reference to myself. For example, one man may wish that 
everybody understood science, and another that everybody appreciated art; it is a personal 
difference between the two men that produces this difference in their desires. 

The personal element becomes apparent as soon as controversy is involved. Suppose some man 
says: "You are wrong to wish everybody to be happy; you ought to desire the happiness of 
Germans and the unhappiness of everyone else." Here "ought" may be taken to mean that that is 
what the speaker wishes me to desire. I might retort that, not being German, it is psychologically 
impossible for me to desire the unhappiness of all non-Germans; but this answer seems 
inadequate. 

Again, there may be a conflict of purely impersonal ideals. Nietzsche's hero differs from a 
Christian saint, yet both are impersonally admired, the one by Nietzscheans, the other by 
Christians. How are we to decide between the two except by means of our own desires? Yet, if 
there is nothing further, an ethical disagreement can only be decided by emotional appeals, or by 
force— in the ultimate resort,, by war. On questions of fact, we can appeal to science and scientific 
methods of observation; but on ultimate questions of ethics there seems to be nothing analogous. 
Yet, if this is really the case, ethical disputes resolve themselves into contests for power- 
including propaganda power. 

This point of view, in a crude form, is put forth in the first book of the Republic by Thrasymachus, 
who, like almost all the characters in Plato's dialogues, was a real person. He was a Sophist from 
Chalcedon, and a famous teacher of rhetoric; he appeared in the first comedy of Aristophanes, 427 
B.C. After Socrates has, for some time, been 


- 116 - 



amiably discussing justice with an old man named Cephalus, and with Plato's elder brothers 
Glancon and Adeimanms, Thrasymachus, who has been listening with growing impatience, breaks 
in with a vehement protest against such childish nonsense. He proclaims emphatically that "justice 
is nothing else than the interest of the stronger." 

This point of view is refuted by Socrates with quibbles; it is never fairly faced. It raises the 
fundamental question in ethics and politics, namely: Is there any standard of "good" and "bad," 
except what the man using these words desires? If there is not, many of the consequences drawn 
by Thrasymachus seem unescapable. Yet how are we to say that there is? 

At this point, religion has, at first sight, a simple answer. God detennines what is good and what 
bad; the man whose will is in harmony with the will of God is a good man. Yet this answer is not 
quite orthodox. Theologians say that God is good, and this implies that there is a standard of 
goodness which is independent of God's will. We are thus forced to face the question: Is there 
objective truth or falsehood in such a statement as "pleasure is good," in the same sense as in such 
a statement as "snow is white"? 

To answer this question, a very long discussion would be necessary. Some may think that we can, 
for practical purposes, evade the fundamental issue, and say: "I do not know what is meant by 
'objective truth,’ but I shall consider a statement 'true' if all, or virtually all, of those who have 
investigated it are agreed in upholding it." In this sense, it is "true" that snow is white, that Caesar 
was assassinated, that water is composed of hydrogen and oxygen, and so on. We are then faced 
with a question of fact: are there any similarly agreed statements in ethics? If there are, they can be 
made the basis both for rules of private conduct, and for a theory of politics. If there are not, we 
are driven in practice, whatever may be the philosophic truth, to a contest by force or propaganda 
or both, whenever an irreconcilable ethical difference exists between powerful groups. 

For Plato, this question does not really exist. Although his dramatic sense leads him to state the 
position of Thrasymachns forcibly, he is quite unaware of its strength, and allows himself to be 
grossly unfair in arguing against it. Plato is convinced that there is "the Good," and that its nature 
can be ascertained; when people disagree 


- 117 - 



about it, one, at least, is making an intellectual error, just as much as if the disagreement were a 
scientific one on some matter of fact. 

The difference between Plato and Thrasymachus is very important, but for the historian of 
philosophy it is one to be only noted, not decided. Plato thinks he can prove that his ideal 
Republic is good; a democrat who accepts the objectivity of ethics may think that he can prove the 
Republic bad; but any one who agrees with Thrasymachus will say: "There is no question of 
proving or disproving; the only question is whether you like the kind of State that Plato desires. If 
you do, it is good for you; if you do not, it is bad for you. If many do and many do not, the 
decision cannot be made by reason, but only by force, actual or concealed." This is one of the 
issues in philosophy that are still open; on each side there are men who command respect. But for 
a very long time the opinion that Plato advocated remained almost undisputed. 

It should be observed, further, that the view which substitutes the consensus of opinion for an 
objective standard has certain consequences that few would accept. What are we to say of 
scientific innovators like Galileo, who advocate an opinion with which few agree, but finally win 
the support of almost everybody? They do so by means of arguments, not by emotional appeals or 
state propaganda or the use of force. This implies a criterion other than the general opinion. In 
ethical matters, there is something analogous in the case of the great religious teachers. Christ 
taught that it is not wrong to pluck ears of corn on the Sabbath, but that it is wrong to hate your 
enemies. Such ethical innovations obviously imply some standard other than majority opinion, but 
the standard, whatever it is, is not objective fact, as in a scientific question. This problem is a 
difficult one, and I do not profess to be able to solve it. For the present, let us be content to note it. 

Plato's Republic, unlike modern Utopias, was perhaps intended to be actually founded. This was 
not so fantastic or impossible as it might naturally seem to us. Many of its provisions, including 
some that we should have thought quite impracticable, were actually realized at Sparta. The rule 
of philosophers had been attempted by Pythagoras, and in Plato's time Archytas the Pythagorean 
was politically influential in Taras (the modern Taranto) when Plato visited Sicily and southern 
Italy. It was a common practice for cities to employ a sage 


- 118 - 



to draw up their laws; Solon had done this for Athens, and Protagoras for Thurii. Colonies, in 
those days, were completely free from control by their parent cities, and it would have been quite 
feasible for a band of Platonists to establish the Republic on the shores of Spain or Gaul. 
Unfortunately chance led Plato to Syracuse, a great commercial city engaged in desperate wars 
with Carthage; in such an atmosphere, no philosopher could have achieved much. In the next 
generation, the rise of Macedonia had made all small States antiquated, and had brought about the 
futility of all political experiments in miniature. 

CHAPTER XV The Theory of Ideas 

THE middle of the Republic, from the later part of Book V to the end of Book VII, is occupied 
mainly with questions of pure philosophy, as opposed to politics. These questions are introduced 
by a somewhat abrupt statement: 

Until philosophers are kings, or the kings and princes of this world have the spirit and power of 
philosophy, and political greatness and wisdom meet in one, and those commoner natures who 
pursue either to the exclusion of the other are compelled to stand aside, cities will never have rest 
from these evils— no, nor the human race, as I believe— and then only will this our State have a 
possibility of life and behold the light of day. 

If this is true, we must decide what constitutes a philosopher, and what we mean by "philosophy." 
The consequent discussion is the most famous part of the Republic, and has perhaps been the most 
in. fluential. It has, in parts, extraordinary literary beauty; the reader may disagree (as I do) with 
what is said, but cannot help being moved by it. 

Plato's philosophy rests on the distinction between reality and appearance, which was first set 
forth by Parmenides; throughout the 


- 119 - 



discussion with which we are now concerned, Parmenidean phrases and arguments are constantly 
recurring. There is, however, a religious tone about reality, which is rather Pythagorean than 
Parmenidean; and there is much about mathematics and music which is directly traceable to the 
disciples of Pythagoras. This combination of the logic of Parmenides with the other-worldliness of 
Pythagoras and the Orphics produced a doctrine which was felt to be satisfying to both the 
intellect and the religious emotions; the result was a very powerful synthesis, which, with various 
modifications, influenced most of the great philosophers, down to and including Hegel. But not 
only philosophers were influenced by Plato. Why did the Puritans object to the music and painting 
and gorgeous ritual of the Catholic Church? You will find the answer in the tenth book of the 
Republic. Why are children in school compelled to learn arithmetic? The reasons are given in the 
seventh book. 

The following paragraphs summarize Plato's theory of ideas. 

Our question is: What is a philosopher? The first answer is in accordance with the etymology: a 
philosopher is a lover of wisdom. But this is not the same thing as a lover of knowledge, in the 
sense in which an inquisitive man may be said to love knowledge; vulgar curiosity does not make 
a philosopher. The definition is therefore amended: the philosopher is a man who loves the 
"vision of truth." But what is this vision? 

Consider a man who loves beautiful things, who makes a point of being present at new tragedies, 
seeing new pictures, and hearing new music. Such a man is not a philosopher, because he loves 
only beautiful things, whereas the philosopher loves beauty in itself. The man who only loves 
beautiful things is dreaming, whereas the man who knows absolute beauty is wide awake. The 
former has only opinion; the latter has knowledge. 

What is the difference between "knowledge" and "opinion"? The man who has knowledge has 
knowledge of something, that is to say, of something that exists, for what does not exist is 
nothing. (This is reminiscent of Parmenides.) Thus knowledge is infallible, since it is logically 
impossible for it to be mistaken. But opinion can be mistaken. How can this be? Opinion cannot 
be of what is not, for that is impossible; nor of what is, for then it would be knowledge. Therefore 
opinion must be of what both is and is not. 


- 120 - 



But how is this possible? The answer is that particular things always partake of opposite 
characters: what is beautiful is also, in some respects, ugly; what is just is, in some respects, 
unjust; and so on. All particular sensible objects, so Plato contends, have this contradictory 
character; they are thus intermediate between being and not-being, and are suitable as objects of 
opinion, but not of knowledge. "But those who see the absolute and eternal and immutable may be 
said to know, and not to have opinion only." 

Thus we arrive at the conclusion that opinion is of the world presented to the senses, whereas 
knowledge is of a super-sensible eternal world; for instance, opinion is concerned with particular 
beautiful things, but knowledge is concerned with beauty in itself. 

The only argument advanced is that it is self-contradictory to suppose that a thing can be both 
beautiful and not beautiful, or both just and not just, and that nevertheless particular things seem 
to combine such contradictory characters. Therefore particular things are not real. Heraclitus had 
said: "We step and do not step into the same rivers; we are and are not." By combining this with 
Parmenides we arrive at Plato's result. 

There is, however, something of great importance in Plato's doctrine which is not traceable to his 
predecessors, and that is the theory of "ideas" or "forms." This theory is partly logical, partly 
metaphysical. The logical part has to do with the meaning of general words. There are many 
individual animals of whom we can truly say "this is a cat." What do we mean by the word "cat"? 
Obviously something different from each particular cat. An animal is a cat, it would seem, 
because it participates in a general nature common to all cats. Language cannot get on without 
general words such as "cat," and such words are evidently not meaningless. But if the word "cat" 
means anything, it means something which is not this or that cat, but some kind of universal 
cattyness. This is not born when a particular cat is bom, and does not die when it dies. In fact, it 
has no position in space or time; it is "eternal." This is the logical part of the doctrine. The 
arguments in its favour, whether ultimately valid or not, are strong, and quite independent of the 
metaphysical part of the doctrine. 

According to the metaphysical part of the doctrine, the word "cat" means a certain ideal cat, " the 
cat," created by God, and unique. Particular cats partake of the nature of the cat, but more or less 
im- 


- 121 - 



perfectly; it is only owing to this imperfection that there can be many of them. The cat is real; 
particular cats are only apparent. 

In the last book of the Republic, as a preliminary to a condemnation of painters, there is a very 
clear exposition of the doctrine of ideas or forms. 

Here Plato explains that, whenever a number of individuals have a common name, they have also 
a common "idea" or "form." For instance, though there are many beds, there is only one "idea" or 
"form" of a bed. Just as a reflection of a bed in a mirror is only apparent and not "real," so the 
various particular beds are unreal, being only copies of the "idea," which is the one real bed, and is 
made by God. Of this one bed, made by God, there can be knowledge, but in respect of the many 
beds made by carpenters there can be only opinion. The philosopher, as such, will be interested 
only in the one ideal bed, not in the many beds found in the sensible world. He will have a certain 
indifference to ordinary mundane affairs: "how can he who has magnificence of mind and is the 
spectator of all time and all existence, think much of human life?" The youth who is capable of 
becoming a philosopher will be distinguished among his fellows as just and gentle, fond of 
learning, possessed of a good memory and a naturally harmonious mind. Such a one shall be 
educated into a philosopher and a guardian. 

At this point Adeimantus breaks in with a protest. When he tries to argue with Socrates, he says, 
he feels himself led a little astray at each step, until, in the end, all his former notions are turned 
upside down. But whatever Socrates may say, it remains the case, as any one can see, that people 
who stick to philosophy become strange monsters, not to say utter rogues; even the best of them 
are made useless by philosophy. 

Socrates admits that this is true in the world as it is, but maintains that it is the other people who 
are to blame, not the philosophers; in a wise community the philosophers would not seem foolish; 
it is only among fools that the wise are judged to be destitute of wisdom. 

What are we to do in this dilemma? There were to have been two ways of inaugurating our 
Republic: by philosophers becoming rulers, or by rulers becoming philosophers. The first way 
seems impossible as a beginning, because in a city not already philosophic the philosophers are 
unpopular. But a born prince might be a philosopher, 


- 122 - 



and "one is enough; let there be one man who has a city obedient to his will, and he might bring 
into existence the ideal polity about which the world is so incredulous." Plato hoped that he had 
found such a prince in the younger Dionysius, tyrant of Syracuse, but the young man turned out 
disappointingly. 

In the sixth and seventh books of the Republic, Plato is concerned with two questions: First, what 
is philosophy? Second, how can a young man or woman, of suitable temperament, be so educated 
as to become a philosopher? 

Philosophy, for Plato, is a kind of vision, the "vision of truth." It is not purely intellectual; it is not 
merely wisdom, but love of wisdom. Spinoza's "intellectual love of God" is much the same 
intimate union of thought and feeling. Every one who has done any kind of creative work has 
experienced, in a greater or less degree, the state of mind in which, after long labour, truth, or 
beauty, appears, or seems to appear, in a sudden glory— it may be only about some small matter, or 
it may be about the universe. The experience is, at the moment, very convincing; doubt may come 
later, but at the time there is utter certainty. I think most of the best creative work, in art, in 
science, in literature, and in philosophy, has been the result of such a moment. Whether it comes 
to others as to me, I cannot say. For my part, I have found that, when I wish to write a book on 
some subject, I must first soak myself in detail, until all the separate parts of the subject-matter are 
familiar; then, some day, if I am fortunate, I perceive the whole, with all its parts duly interrelated. 
After that, I only have to write down what I have seen. The nearest analogy is first walking all 
over a mountain in a mist, until every path and ridge and valley is separately familiar, and then, 
from a distance, seeing the mountain whole and clear in bright sunshine. 

This experience, I believe, is necessary to good creative work, but it is not sufficient; indeed the 
subjective certainty that it brings with it may be fatally misleading. William James describes a 
man who got the experience from laughing-gas; whenever he was under its influence, he knew the 
secret of the universe, but when he came to, he had forgotten it. At last, with immense effort, he 
wrote down the secret before the vision had faded. When completely recovered, he rushed to see 
what he had written. It was: "A smell of petroleum prevails throughout." What seems like sudden 
insight may be mis- 


- 123 - 



leading, and must be tested soberly when the divine intoxication has passed. 

Plato's vision, which he completely trusted at the time when he wrote the Republic, needs 
ultimately the help of a parable, the parable of the cave, in order to convey its nature to the reader. 
But it is led up to by various preliminary discussions, designed to make the reader see the 
necessity of the world of ideas. 

First, the world of the intellect is distinguished from the world of the senses; then intellect and 
sense-perception are in turn each divided into two kinds. The two kinds of sense-perception need 
not concern us; the two kinds of intellect are called, respectively, "reason" and "understanding." 
Of these, reason is the higher kind; it is concerned with pure ideas, and its method is dialectic. 
Understanding is the kind of intellect that is used in mathematics; it is inferior to reason in that it 
uses hypotheses which it cannot test. In geometry, for example, we say: "Let ABC be a rectilinear 
triangle." It is against the rules to ask whether ABC really is a rectilinear triangle, although, if it is 
a figure that we have drawn, we may be sure that it is not, because we cannot draw absolutely 
straight lines. Accordingly, mathematics can never tell us what is, but only what would be if. . . . 
There are no straight lines in the sensible world; therefore, if mathematics is to have more than 
hypothetical truth, we must find evidence for the existence of super-sensible straight lines in a 
super-sensible world. This cannot be done by the understanding, but according to Plato it can be 
done by reason, which shows that there is a rectilinear triangle in heaven, of which geometrical 
propositions can be affirmed categorically, not hypothetically. 

There is, at this point, a difficulty which seems to have escaped Plato's notice, although it was 
evident to modem idealistic philosophers. We saw that God made only one bed, and it would be 
natural to suppose that he made only one straight line. But if there is a heavenly triangle, he must 
have made at least three straight lines. The objects of geometry, though ideal, must exist in many 
examples; we need the possibility of two intersecting circles, and so on. This suggests that 
geometry, on Plato's theory, should not be capable of ultimate truth, but should be condemned as 
part of the study of appearance. We will, however, ignore this point. 

Plato seeks to explain the difference between clear intellectual 


- 124 - 



vision and the confused vision of sense-perception by an analogy from the sense of sight. Sight, he 
says, differs from the other senses, since it requires not only the eye and the object, but also light. 
We see clearly objects on which the sun shines; in twilight we see confusedly, and in pitch- 
darkness not at all. Now the world of ideas is what we see when the object is illumined by the sun, 
while the world of passing things is a confused twilight world. The eye is compared to the soul, 
and the sun, as the source of light, to truth or goodness. 

The soul is like an eye: when resting upon that on which truth and being shine, the soul perceives 
and understands, and is radiant with intelligence; but when turned towards the twilight of 
becoming and perishing, then she has opinion only, and goes blinking about, and is first of one 
opinion and then of another, and seems to have no intelligence. . . . Now what imparts truth to the 
known and the power of knowing to the knower is what I would have you tenn the idea of good, 
and this you will deem to be the cause of science. 

This leads up to the famous simile of the cave or den, according to which those who are destitute 
of philosophy may be compared to prisoners in a cave, who are only able to look in one direction 
because they are bound, and who have a fire behind them and a wall in front. Between them and 
the wall there is nothing; all that they see are shadows of themselves, and of objects behind them, 
cast on the wall by the light of the fire. Inevitably they regard these shadows as real, and have no 
notion of the objects to which they are due. At last some man succeeds in escaping from the cave 
to the light of the sun; for the first time he sees real things, and becomes aware that he had hitherto 
been deceived by shadows. If he is the sort of philosopher who is fit to become a guardian, he will 
feel it his duty to those who were fonnerly his fellow-prisoners to go down again into the cave, 
instruct them as to the truth, and show them the way up. But he will have difficulty in persuading 
them, because, coming out of the sunlight, he will see shadows less clearly than they do, and will 
seem to them stupider than before his escape. 

"And now, I said, let me show in a figure how far our nature is enlightened or unenlightened: — 
Behold! human beings living in an underground den, which has a mouth open toward the light and 
reaching all along the den; here they have been from their child- 


- 125 - 



hood, and have their legs and necks chained so that they cannot move, and can only see before 
them, being prevented by the chains from turning round their heads. Above and behind them a fire 
is blazing at a distance, and between the fire and the prisoners there is a raised way; and you will 
see, if you look, a low wall built along the way, like the screen which marionette players have in 
front of them, over which they show the puppets. 

"I see. 

"And do you see, I said, men passing along the wall carrying all sorts of vessels, and statues and 
figures of animals made of wood and stone and various materials, which appear over the wall? 
Some of them are talking, others silent. 

"You have shown me a strange image, and they are strange prisoners. 

"Like ourselves, I replied; and they see only their own shadows, or the shadows of one another, 
which the fire throws on the opposite wall of the cave." 

The position of the good in Plato’s philosophy is peculiar. Science and truth, he says, are like the 
good, but the good has a higher place. "The good is not essence, but far exceeds essence in dignity 
and power." Dialectic leads to the end of the intellectual world in the perception of the absolute 
good. It is by means of the good that dialectic is able to dispense with the hypotheses of the 
mathematician. The underlying assumption is that reality, as opposed to appearance, is completely 
and perfectly good; to perceive the good, therefore, is to perceive reality. Throughout Plato's 
philosophy there is the same fusion of intellect and mysticism as in Pythagoreanism, but at this 
final culmination mysticism clearly has the upper hand. 

Plato's doctrine of ideas contains a number of obvious errors. But in spite of these it marks a very 
important advance in philosophy, since it is the first theory to emphasise the problem of 
universals, which, in varying forms, has persisted to the present day. Beginnings are apt to be 
crude, but their originality should not be overlooked on this account. Something remains of what 
Plato had to say, even after all necessary corrections have been made. The absolute minimum of 
what remains, even in the view of those most hostile to Plato, is this: that we cannot express 
ourselves in a language composed wholly of proper names, but must have also general words such 
as "man," 


- 126 - 



"dog," "cat"; or, if not these, then relational words such as "similar," "before," and so on. Such 
words are not meaningless noises, and it is difficult to see how they can have meaning if the world 
consists entirely of particular things, such as are designated by proper names. There may be ways 
of getting round this argument, but at any rate it affords a prima facie case in favour of universals. 
I shall provisionally accept it as in some degree valid. But when so much is granted, the rest of 
what Plato says by no means follows. 

In the first place, Plato has no understanding of philosophical syntax. I can say " Socrates is 
human,"" Plato is human," and so on. In all these statements, it may be assumed that the word 
"human" has exactly the same meaning. But whatever it means, it means something which is not 
of the same kind as Socrates, Plato, and the rest of the individuals who compose the human race. 
"Human" is an adjective; it would be nonsense to say "human is human." Plato makes a mistake 
analogous to saying "human is human." He thinks that beauty is beautiful; he thinks that the 
universal "man" is the name of a pattern man created by God, of whom actual men are imperfect 
and somewhat unreal copies. He fails altogether to realize how great is the gap between universals 
and particulars; his "ideas" are really just other particulars, ethically and aesthetically superior to 
the ordinary kind. He himself, at a later date, began to see this difficulty, as appears in the 
Parmenides, which contains one of the most remarkable cases in history of self-criticism by a 
philosopher. 

The Parmenides is supposed to be related by Antiphon ( Plato's half-brother), who alone 
remembers the conversation, but is now only interested in horses. They find him carrying a bridle, 
and with difficulty persuade him to relate the famous discussion between Pannenides, Zeno, and 
Socrates. This, we are told, took place when Parmenides was old (about sixty-five), Zeno in 
middle life (about forty), and Socrates quite a young man. Socrates expounds the theory of ideas; 
he is sure that there are ideas of likeness, justice, beauty, and goodness; he is not sure that there is 
an idea of man; and he rejects with indignation the suggestion that there could be ideas of such 
things as hair and mud and dirt— though, he adds, there are times when he thinks that there is 
nothing without an idea. He runs away from this view because he is afraid of falling into a 
bottomless pit of nonsense. 


- 127 - 



"Yes, Socrates, said Parmenides; that is because you are still young; the time will come, if I am 
not mistaken, when philosophy will have a firmer grasp of you, and then you will not despise even 
the meanest things." 

Socrates agrees that, in his view, "There are certain ideas of which all other things partake, and 
from which they derive their names; that similars, for example, become similar, because they 
partake of similarity; and great things become great, because they partake of greatness; and that 
just and beautiful things become just and beautiful, because they partake of justice and beauty." 

Parmenides proceeds to raise difficulties. ( a ) Does the individual partake of the whole idea, or 
only of a part? To either view there are objections. If the former, one thing is in many places at 
once; if the latter, the idea is divisible, and a thing which has a part of smallness will be smaller 
than absolute smallness, which is absurd. ( b ) When an individual partakes of an idea, the 
individual and the idea are similar; therefore there will have to be another idea, embracing both 
the particulars and the original idea. And there will have to be yet another, embracing the 
particulars and the two ideas, and so on ad infinitum. Thus every idea, instead of being one, 
becomes an infinite series of ideas. (This is the same as Aristotle's argument of the "third man.") 
(c) Socrates suggests that perhaps ideas are only thoughts, but Parmenides points out that thoughts 
must be of something, (d) Ideas cannot resemble the particulars that partake of them, for the 
reason given in ( b ) above, (e) Ideas, if there are any, must be unknown to us, because our 
knowledge is not absolute, (f) If God's knowledge is absolute, He will not know us, and therefore 
cannot rule us. 

Nevertheless, the theory of ideas is not wholly abandoned. Without ideas, Socrates says, there will 
be nothing on which the mind can rest, and therefore reasoning will be destroyed. Pannenides tells 
him that his troubles come of lack of previous training, but no definite conclusion is reached. 

I do not think that Plato's logical objections to the reality of sensible particulars will bear 
examination. He says, for example, that whatever is beautiful is also in some respect ugly; what is 
double is also half; and so on. But when we say of some work of art that it is beautiful in some 
respects and ugly in others, analysis will always (at least 


- 128 - 



theoretically) enable us to say "this part or aspect is beautiful, while that part or aspect is ugly." 
And as regards "double" and "half," these are relative terms; there is no contradiction in the fact 
that 2 is double of 1 and half of 4. Plato is perpetually getting into trouble through not 
understanding relative tenns. He thinks that if A is greater than B and less than C, then A is at 
once great and small, which seems to him a contradiction. Such troubles are among the infantile 
diseases of philosophy. 

The distinction between reality and appearance cannot have the consequences attributed to it by 
Parmenides and Plato and Hegel. If appearance really appears, it is not nothing, and is therefore 
part of reality; this is an argument of the correct Parmenidean sort. If appearance does not really 
appear, why trouble our heads about it? But perhaps some one will say: "Appearance does not 
really appear, but it appears to appear." This will not help, for we shall ask again: "Does it really 
appear to appear, or only apparently appear to appear?" Sooner or later, if appearance is even to 
appear to appear, we must reach something that really appears, and is therefore part of reality. 
Plato would not dream of denying that there appear to be many beds, although there is only one 
real bed, namely the one made by God. But he does not seem to have faced the implications of the 
fact that there are many appearances, and that this many-ness is part of reality. Any attempt to 
divide the world into portions, of which one is more "real" than the other, is doomed to failure. 

Connected with this is another curious view of Plato's, that knowledge and opinion must be 
concerned with different subject-matters. We should say: If I think it is going to snow, that is 
opinion; if later I see it snowing, that is knowledge; but the subject-matter is the same on both 
occasions. Plato, however, thinks that what can at any time be a matter of opinion can never be a 
matter of knowledge. Knowledge is certain and infallible; opinion is not merely fallible, but is 
necessarily mistaken, since it assumes the reality of what is only appearance. All this repeats what 
had been said by Pannenides. 

There is one respect in which Plato's metaphysic is apparently different from that of Parmenides. 
For Parmenides there is only the One; for Plate, there are many ideas. There are not only beauty, 
truth, and goodness, but, as we saw, there is the heavenly bed, created by God; there is a heavenly 
man, a heavenly dog, a heavenly cat, and 


- 129 - 



so on through a whole Noah's ark. All this, however, seems, in the Republic, to have been not 
adequately thought out. A Platonic idea or fonn is not a thought, though it may be the object of a 
thought. It is difficult to see how God can have created it, since its being is timeless, and he could 
not have decided to create a bed unless his thought, when he decided, had had for its object that 
very Platonic bed which we are told he brought into existence. What is timeless must be 
uncreated. We come here to a difficulty which has troubled many philosophic theologians. Only 
the contingent world, the world in space and time, can have been created; but this is the every-day 
world which has been condemned as illusory and also bad. Therefore the Creator, it would seem, 
created only illusion and evil. Some Gnostics were so consistent as to adopt this view; but in Plato 
the difficulty is still below the surface, and he seems, in the Republic, to have never become aware 
of it. 

The philosopher who is to be a guardian must, according to Plato, return into the cave, and live 
among those who have never seen the sun of truth. It would seem that God Himself, if He wishes 
to amend His creation, must do likewise; a Christian Platonist might so interpret the Incarnation. 
But it remains completely impossible to explain why God was not content with the world of ideas. 
The philosopher finds the cave in existence, and is actuated by benevolence in returning to it; but 
the Creator, if He created everything, might, one would think, have avoided the cave altogether. 

Perhaps this difficulty arises only from the Christian notion of a Creator, and is not chargeable to 
Plato, who says that God did not create everything, but only what is good. The multiplicity of the 
sensible world, on this view, would have some other source than God. And the ideas would, 
perhaps, be not so much created by God as constituents of His essence. The apparent pluralism 
involved in the multiplicity of ideas would thus not be ultimate. Ultimately there is only God, or 
the Good, to whom the ideas are adjectival. This, at any rate, is a possible interpretation of Plato. 

Plato proceeds to an interesting sketch of the education proper to a young man who is to be a 
guardian. We saw that the young man is selected for this honour on the ground of a combination 
of intellectual and moral qualities: he must be just and gentle, fond of learning, with a good 
memory and a harmonious mind. The young man 


- 130 - 



who has been chosen for these merits will spend the years from twenty to thirty on the four 
Pythagorean studies: arithmetic, geometry (plane and solid), astronomy, and harmony. These 
studies are not to be pursued in any utilitarian spirit, but in order to prepare his mind for the vision 
of eternal things. In astronomy, for example, he is not to trouble himself too much about the actual 
heavenly bodies, but rather with the mathematics of the motion of ideal heavenly bodies. This may 
sound absurd to modem ears, but, strange to say, it proved to be a fruitful point of view in 
connection with empirical astronomy. The way this came about is curious, and worth considering. 

The apparent motions of the planets, until they have been very profoundly analysed, appear to be 
irregular and complicated, and not at all such as a Pythagorean Creator would have chosen. It was 
obvious to every Greek that the heavens ought to exemplify mathematical beauty, which would 
only be the case if the planets moved in circles. This would be especially evident to Plato, owing 
to his emphasis on the good. The problem thus arose: is there any hypothesis which will reduce 
the apparent disorderliness of planetary motions to order and beauty and simplicity? If there is, the 
idea of the good will justify us in asserting this hypothesis. Aristarchus of Samos found such a 
hypothesis: that all the planets, including the earth, go round the sun in circles. This view was 
rejected for two thousand years, partly on the authority of Aristotle, who attributes a rather similar 
hypothesis to "the Pythagoreans" ( De Coe/o, 293 a). It was revived by Copernicus, and its success 
might seem to justify Plato's aesthetic bias in astronomy. Unfortunately, however, Kepler 
discovered that the planets move in ellipses, not in circles, with the sun at a focus, not at the 
centre; then Newton discovered that they do not move even in exact ellipses. And so the 
geometrical simplicity sought by Plato, and apparently found by Aristarchus of Samos, proved in 
the end illusory. 

This piece of scientific history illustrates a general maxim: that any hypothesis, however absurd, 
may be useful in science, if it enables a discoverer to conceive things in a new way; but that, when 
it has served this purpose by luck, it is likely to become an obstacle to further advance. The belief 
in the good as the key to the scientific understanding of the world was useful, at a certain stage, in 
as- 


- 131 - 



tronomy, but at every later stage it was harmful. The ethical and aesthetic bias of Plato, and still 
more of Aristotle, did much to kill Greek science. 

It is noteworthy that modem Platonists, almost without exception, are ignorant of mathematics, 
in spite of the immense importance that Plato attached to arithmetic and geometry, and the 
immense influence that they had on his philosophy. This is an example of the evils of 
specialization: a man must not write on Plato unless he has spent so much of his youth on 
Greek as to have had no time for the things that Plato thought important. 

CHAPTER XVI Plato's Theory of Immortality 

THE dialogue called after Phaedo is interesting in several respects. It purports to describe the 
last moments in the life of Socrates: his conversation immediately before drinking the hemlock, 
and after, until he loses consciousness. This presents Plato's ideal of a man who is both wise 
and good in the highest degree, and who is totally without fear of death. Socrates in face of 
death, as represented by Plato, was important ethically, both in ancient and in modem times. 
What the gospel account of the Passion and the Crucifixion was for Christians, the Phaedo was 
for pagan or freethinking philosophers. jyBut the imperturbability of Socrates in his last hour is 
bound up with his belief in immortality, and the Phaedo is important as setting forth, not only 
the death of a martyr, but also many doctrines which were afterwards Christian. The theology of 
St. Paul and of the Fathers was largely derived from it, directly or indirectly, and can hardly be 
understood if Plato is ignored. 


* Even for many Christians, it is second only to the death of Christ. "There is nothing in any 
tragedy, ancient or modern, nothing in poetry or history (with one exception), like the last 
hours of Socrates in Plato." These are the words of the Rev. Benjamin Jowett. 


- 132 - 


An earlier dialogue, the Crito, tells how certain friends and disciples of Socrates arranged a plan 
by which he could escape to Thessaly. Probably the Athenian authorities would have been quite 
glad if he had escaped, and the scheme suggested may be assumed to have been very likely to 
succeed. Socrates, however, would have none of it. He contended that he had been condemned by 
due process of law, and that it would be wrong to do anything illegal to avoid punishment. He first 
proclaimed the principle which we associate with the Sennon on the Mount, that "we ought not to 
retaliate evil for evil to any one, whatever evil we may have suffered from him." He then imagines 
himself engaged in a dialogue with the laws of Athens, in which they point out that he owes them 
the kind of respect that a son owes to a father or a slave to his master, but in an even higher 
degree; and that, moreover, every Athenian citizen is free to emigrate if he dislikes the Athenian 
State. The laws end a long speech with the words: 

Listen, then, Socrates, to us who have brought you up. Think not of life and children first, and of 
justice afterwards, but of justice first, that you may be justified before the princes of the world 
below. For neither will you nor any that belong to you be happier or holier or juster in this life, or 
happier in another, if you do as Crito bids. Now you depart in innocence, a sufferer and not a doer 
of evil; a victim, not of the laws, but of men. But if you go forth, returning evil for evil, and injury 
for injury, breaking the covenants and agreements which you have made with us, and wronging 
those whom you ought least of all to wrong, that is to say, yourself, your friends, your country, and 
us, we shall be angry with you while you live, and our brethren, the laws in the world below, will 
receive you as an enemy; for they will know that you have done your best to destroy us. 

This voice, Socrates says, "I seem to hear humming in my ears, like the sound of the flute in the 
ears of the mystic." He decides, accordingly, that it is his duty to stay and abide the death 
sentence. 

In the Phaedo, the last hour has come; his chains are taken off, and he is allowed to converse 
freely with his friends. He sends away his weeping wife, in order that her grief may not interfere 
with the discussion. 

Socrates begins by maintaining that, though any one who has the 


- 133 - 



spirit of philosophy will not fear death, but, on the contrary, will welcome it, yet he will not take 
his own life, for that is held to be unlawful. His friends inquire why suicide is held to be unlawful, 
and his answer, which is in accordance with Orphic doctrine, is almost exactly what a Christian 
might say. "There is a doctrine whispered in secret that man is a prisoner who has no right to open 
the door and run away; this is a great mystery which I do not quite understand." He compares the 
relation of man to God with that of cattle to their owner; you would be angry, he says, if your ox 
took the liberty of putting himself out of the way, and so "there may be reason in saying that a 
man should wait, and not take his own life until God summons him, as he is now summoning 
me." He is not grieved at death, because he is convinced "in the first place that I am going to other 
gods who are wise and good (of which I am as certain as I can be of any such matters), and 
secondly (though I am not so sure of this last) to men departed, better than those whom I leave 
behind. I have good hope that there is yet something remaining for the dead, some far better thing 
for the good than for the evil." 

Death, says Socrates, is the separation of soul and body. Here we come upon Plato's dualism: 
between reality and appearance, ideas and sensible objects, reason and sense-perception, soul and 
body. These pairs are connected: the first in each pair is superior to the second both in reality and 
in goodness. An ascetic morality was the natural consequence of this dualism. Christianity 
adopted this doctrine in part, but never wholly. There were two obstacles. The first was that the 
creation of the visible world, if Plato was right, must have been an evil deed, and therefore the 
Creator could not be good. The second was that orthodox Christianity could never bring itself to 
condemn marriage, though it held celibacy to be nobler. The Manichaeans were more consistent in 
both respects. 

The distinction between mind and matter, which has become a commonplace in philosophy and 
science and popular thought, has a religious origin, and began as the distinction of soul and body. 
The Orphic, as we saw, proclaims himself the child of earth and of the starry heaven; from earth 
comes the body, from heaven the soul. It is this theory that Plato seeks to express in the language 
of philosophy. 

Socrates, in the Phaedo, proceeds at once to develop the ascetic implications of his doctrine, but 
his asceticism is of a moderate and 


- 134 - 



gentlemanly sort. He does not say that the philosopher should wholly abstain from ordinary 
pleasures, but only that he should not be a slave to them. The philosopher should not care about 
eating and drinking, but of course he should eat as much as is necessary; there is no suggestion of 
fasting. And we are told that Socrates, though indifferent to wine, could, on occasion, drink more 
than anybody else, without ever becoming intoxicated. It was not drinking that he condemned, but 
pleasure in drinking. In like manner, the philosopher must not care for the pleasures of love, or for 
costly raiment, or sandals, or other adornments of the person. He must be entirely concerned with 
the soul, and not with the body: "He would like, as far as he can, to get away from the body and to 
turn to the soul." 

It is obvious that this doctrine, popularized, would become ascetic, but in intention it is not, 
properly speaking, ascetic. The philosopher will not abstain with an effort from the pleasures of 
sense, but will be thinking of other things. I have known many philosophers who forgot their 
meals, and read a book when at last they did eat. These men were acting as Plato says they should: 
they were not abstaining from gluttony by means of a moral effort, but were more interested in 
other matters. Apparently the philosopher should marry, and beget and rear children, in the same 
absent-minded way, but since the emancipation of women this has become more difficult. No 
wonder Xanthippe was a shrew. 

Philosophers, Socrates continues, try to dissever the soul from communion with the body, whereas 
other people think that life is not worth living for a man who has "no sense of pleasure and no part 
in bodily pleasure." In this phrase, Plato seems-perhaps inadvertently— to countenance the view of 
a certain class of moralists, that bodily pleasures are the only ones that count. These moralists hold 
that the man who does not seek the pleasures of sense must be eschewing pleasure altogether, and 
living virtuously. This is an error which has done untold hann. In so far as the division of mind 
and body can be accepted, the worst pleasures, as well as the best, are mental— for example, envy, 
and many forms of cruelty and love of power. Milton's Satan rises superior to physical torment, 
and devotes himself to a work of destruction from which he derives a pleasure that is wholly of 
the mind. Many eminent ecclesiastics, having renounced the pleasures of sense, and being not on 
their guard against 


- 135 - 



others, became dominated by love of power, which led them to appalling cruelties and 
persecutions, nominally for the sake of religion. In our own day, Hitler belongs to this type; by all 
accounts, the pleasures of sense are of very little importance to him. Liberation from the tyranny 
of the body contributes to greatness, but just as much to greatness in sin as to greatness in virtue. 

This, however, is a digression, from which we must return to Socrates. 

We come now to the intellectual aspect of the religion which Plato (rightly or wrongly) attributes 
to Socrates. We are told that the body is a hindrance in the acquisition of knowledge, and that 
sight and hearing are inaccurate witnesses: true existence, if revealed to the soul at all, is revealed 
in thought, not in sense. Let us consider, for a moment, the implications of this doctrine. It 
involves a complete rejection of empirical knowledge, including all history and geography. We 
cannot know that there was such a place as Athens, or such a man as Socrates; his death, and his 
courage in dying, belong to the world of appearance. It is only through sight and hearing that we 
know anything about all this, and the true philosopher ignores sight and hearing. What, then, is 
left to him? First, logic and mathematics; but these are hypothetical, and do not justify any 
categorical assertion about the real world. The next step— and this is the crucial one —depends 
upon the idea of the good. Having arrived at this idea, the philosopher is supposed to know that 
the good is the real, and thus to be able to infer that the world of ideas is the real world. Later 
philosophers had arguments to prove the identity of the real and the good, but Plato seems to have 
assumed it as self-evident. If we wish to understand him, we must, hypothetically, suppose this 
assumption justified. 

Thought is best, Socrates says, when the mind is gathered into itself, and is not troubled by sounds 
or sights or pain or pleasure, but takes leave of the body and aspires after true being; "and in this 
the philosopher dishonours the body." From this point, Socratesr goes on to the ideas or forms or 
essences. There is absolute justice, absolute beauty, and absolute good, but they are not visible to 
the eye. "And I speak not of these alone, but of absolute greatness, and health, and strength, and of 
the essence or true nature of everything." All these are only to be seen by intellectual vision. 
Therefore while we are in 


- 136 - 



the body, and while the soul is infected with the evils of the body, our desire for truth will not be 
satisfied. 

This point of view excludes scientific observation and experiment as methods for the attainment 
of knowledge. The experimenter's mind is not "gathered into itself," and does not aim at avoiding 
sounds or sights. The two kinds of mental activity that can be pursued by the method that Plato 
recommends are mathematics and mystic insight. This explains how these two come to be so 
intimately combined in Plato and the Pythagoreans. 

To the empiricist, the body is what brings us into touch with the world of external reality, but to 
Plato it is doubly evil, as a distorting medium, causing us to see as through a glass darkly, and as a 
source of lusts which distract us from the pursuit of knowledge and the vision of truth. Some 
quotations will make this clear. 

The body is the source of endless trouble to us by reason of the mere requirement of food; and is 
liable also to diseases which overtake and impede us in the search after true being: it fills us full of 
loves, and lusts, and fears, and fancies of all kinds, and endless foolery, and in fact, as men say, 
takes away from us all power of thinking at all. Whence come wars, and fightings and factions? 
Whence but from the body and the lusts of the body? Wars are occasioned by the love of money, 
and money has to be acquired for the sake and in the service of the body; and by reason of all 
these impediments we have no time to give to philosophy; and, last and worst of all, even if we 
are at leisure to betake ourselves to some speculation, the body is always breaking in upon us, 
causing turmoil and confusion in our inquiries, and so amazing us that we are prevented from 
seeing the truth. It has been proved to us by experience that if we would have true knowledge of 
anything we must be quit of the body— the soul in herself must behold things in themselves: and 
then we shall attain the wisdom which we desire, and of which we say we are lovers; not while we 
live, but after death: for if while in company with the body the soul cannot have pure knowledge, 
knowledge must be attained after death, if at all. 

And thus having got rid of the foolishness of the body we shall be pure and have converse with 
the pure, and know of ourselves the clear light everywhere, which is no other than the light of 
truth. For the impure are not pennitted to approach the pure. . . . And what is purification but the 
separation of the soul from the 


- 137 - 



body? . . . And this separation and release of the soul from the body is termed death. . . . And the 
true philosophers, and they only, are ever seeking to release the soul. 

There is one true coin for which all things ought to be exchanged, and that is wisdom. 

The founders of the mysteries would appear to have had a real meaning, and were not talking 
nonsense when they intimated in a figure long ago that he who passes unsanctified and uninitiated 
into the world below will lie in a slough, but that he who arrives there after initiation and 
purification will dwell with the gods. For many, as they say in the mysteries, are the thyrsus- 
bearers, but few are the mystics, meaning, as I interpret the words, the true philosophers. 

All this language is mystical, and is derived from the mysteries. "Purity" is an Orphic conception, 
having primarily a ritual meaning, but for Plato it means freedom from slavery to the body and its 
needs. It is interesting to find him saying that wars are caused by love of money, and that money is 
only needed for the service of the body. The first half of this opinion is the same as that held by 
Marx, but the second belongs to a very different outlook. Plato thinks that a man could live on 
very little money if his wants were reduced to a minimum, and this no doubt is true. But he also 
thinks that a philosopher should be exempt from manual labour; he must therefore live on wealth 
created by others. In a very poor State there are likely to be no philosophers. It was the 
imperialism of Athens in the age of Pericles that made it possible for Athenians to study 
philosophy. Speaking broadly, intellectual goods are just as expensive as more material 
commodities, and just as little independent of economic conditions. Science requires libraries, 
laboratories, telescopes, microscopes, and so on, and men of science have to be supported by the 
labour of others. But to the mystic all this is foolishness. A holy man in India or Tibet needs no 
apparatus, wears only a loin cloth, eats only rice, and is supported by very meagre charity because 
he is thought wise. This is the logical development of Plato's point of view. 

To return to the Phaedo : Cebes expresses doubt as to the survival of the soul after death, and 
urges Socrates to offer arguments. This he proceeds to do, but it must be said that the arguments 
are very poor. 


- 138 - 



The first argument is that all things which have opposites are generated from their opposites— a 
statement which reminds us of Anaximander's views on cosmic justice. Now life and death are 
opposites, and therefore each must generate the other. It follows that the souls of the dead exist 
somewhere, and come back to earth in due course. Saint Paul's statement, "the seed is not 
quickened except it die," seems to belong to some such theory as this. 

The second argument is that knowledge is recollection, and therefore the soul must have existed 
before birth. The theory that knowledge is recollection is supported chiefly by the fact that we 
have ideas, such as exact equality, which cannot be derived from experience. We have experience 
of approximate equality, but absolute equality is never found among sensible objects, and yet we 
know what we mean by "absolute equality." Since we have not learnt this from experience, we 
must have brought the knowledge with us from a previous existence. A similar argument, he says, 
applies to all other ideas. Thus the existence of essences, and our capacity to apprehend them, 
proves the pre-existence of the soul with knowledge. 

The contention that all knowledge is reminiscence is developed at greater length in the Meno (87 
ffi). Here Socrates says "there is no teaching, but only recollection." He professes to prove his 
point by having Meno call in a slave-boy whom Socrates proceeds to question on geometrical 
problems. The boy's answers are supposed to show that he really knows geometry, although he has 
hitherto been unaware of possessing this knowledge. The same conclusion is drawn in the Meno 
as in the Phaedo, that knowledge is brought by the soul from a previous existence. 

As to this, one may observe, in the first place, that the argument is wholly inapplicable to 
empirical knowledge. The slave-boy could not have been led to "remember" when the Pyramids 
were built, or whether the siege of Troy really occurred, unless he had happened to be present at 
these events. Only the sort of knowledge that is called a priori — especially logic and mathematics- 
can be possibly supposed to exist in every one independently of experience. In fact, this is the only 
sort of knowledge (apart from mystic insight) that Plato admits to be really knowledge. Let us see 
how the argument can be met in regard to mathematics. 


- 139 - 



Take the concept of equality. We must admit that we have no experience, among sensible objects, 
of exact equality; we see only approximate equality. How, then, do we arrive at the idea of 
absolute equality? Or do we, perhaps, have no such idea? 

Let us take a concrete case. The metre is defined as the length of a certain rod in Paris at a certain 
temperature. What should we mean if we said, of some other rod, that its length was exactly one 
metre? I don’t think we should mean anything. We could say: The most accurare processes of 
measurement known to science at the present day fail to show that our rod is either longer or 
shorter than the standard metre in Paris. We might, if we were sufficiently rash, add a prophecy 
that no subsequent refinements in the technique of measurement will alter this result. But this is 
still an empirical statement, in the sense that empirical evidence may at any moment disprove it. I 
do not think we really possess the idea of absolute equality that Plato supposes us to possess. 

But even if we do, it is clear that no child possesses it until it reaches a certain age, and that the 
idea is elicited by experience, although not directly derived from experience. Moreover, unless our 
existence before birth was not one of sense-perception, it would have been as incapable of 
generating the idea as this life is; and if our previous existence is supposed to have been partly 
super-sensible, why not make the same supposition concerning our present existence? On all these 
grounds, the argument fails. 

The doctrine of reminiscence being considered established, Cebes says: "About half of what was 
required has been proven; to wit, that our souls existed before we were bom: —that the soul will 
exist after death as well as before birth is the other half of which the proof is still wanting." 
Socrates accordingly applies himself to this. He says that it follows from what was said about 
everything being generated from its opposite, according to which death must generate life just as 
much as life generates death. But he adds another argument, which had a longer history in 
philosophy: that only what is complex can be dissolved, and that the soul, like the ideas, is simple 
and not compounded of parts. What is simple, it is thought, cannot begin or end or change. Now 
essences are unchanging: absolute beauty, for example, is always the same, whereas beautiful 
things continually 


- 140 - 



change. Thus things seen are temporal, but things unseen are eternal. The body is seen, but the 
soul is unseen; therefore the soul is to be classified in the group of things that are eternal. 

The soul, being eternal, is at home in the contemplation of eternal things, that is, essences, but is 
lost and confused when, as in senseperception, it contemplates the world of changing things. 

The soul when using the body as an instrument of perception, that is to say, when using the sense 
of sight or hearing or some other sense (for the meaning of perceiving through the body is 
perceiving through the senses) ... is then dragged by the body into the region of the changeable, 
and wanders and is confused; the world spins round her, and she is like a drunkard, when she 
touches change. . . . But when returning into herself she reflects, then she passes into the other 
world, the region of purity, and eternity, and immortality, and unchangeableness, which are her 
kindred, and with them she ever lives, when she is by herself, and is not let or hindered; then she 
ceases from her erring ways, and being in communion with the unchanging is unchanging. And 
this state of the soul is called wisdom. 

The soul of the true philosopher, which has, in life, been liberated from thraldom to the flesh, will, 
after death, depart to the invisible world, to live in bliss in the company of the gods. But the 
impure soul, which has loved the body, will become a ghost haunting the sepulchre, or will enter 
into the body of an animal, such as an ass or wolf or hawk, according to its character. A man who 
has been virtuous without being a philosopher will become a bee or wasp or ant, or some other 
animal of a gregarious and social sort. 

Only the true philosopher goes to heaven when he dies. "No one who has not studied philosophy 
and who is not entirely pure at the time of his departure is allowed to enter the company of the 
Gods, but the lover of knowledge only." That is why the true votaries of philosophy abstain from 
fleshly lusts: not that they fear poverty or disgrace, but because they "are conscious that the soul 
was simply fastened or glued to the body— until philosophy received her, she could only view real 
existence through the bars of a prison, not in and through herself, . . . and by reason of lust had 
become the principal accomplice in her own captivity." The philosopher will be 


- 141 - 



temperate because "each pleasure and pain is a sort of nail which nails and rivets the soul to the 
body, until she becomes like the body, and believes that to be true which the body affirms to be 
true." 

At this point, Simmias brings up the Pythagorean opinion that the soul is a harmony, and urges: if 
the lyre is broken, can the harmony survive? Socrates replies that the soul is not a harmony, for a 
hannony is complex, but the soul is simple. Moreover, he says, the view that the soul is a harmony 
is incompatible with its pre-existence, which was proved by the doctrine of reminiscence; for the 
hannony does not exist before the lyre. 

Socrates proceeds to give an account of his own philosophical development, which is very 
interesting, but not germane to the main argument. He goes on to expound the doctrine of ideas, 
leading to the conclusion "that ideas exist, and that other things participate in them and derive 
their names from them." At last he describes the fate of souls after death: the good to heaven, the 
bad to hell, the intennediate to purgatory. 

His end, and his farewells, are described. His last words are: "Crito, I owe a cock to Asclepius; 
will you remember to pay the debt?" Men paid a cock to Asclepius when they recovered from an 
illness, and Socrates has recovered from life's fitful fever. 

"Of all the men of his time," Phaedo concludes, "he was the wisest and justest and best." 

The Platonic Socrates was a pattern to subsequent philosophers for many ages. What are we to 
think of him ethically? (I am concerned only with the man as Plato portrays him.) His merits are 
obvious. He is indifferent to worldly success, so devoid of fear that he remains calm and urbane 
and humourous to the last moment, caring more for what he believes to be truth than for anything 
else whatever. He has, however, some very grave defects. He is dishonest and sophistical in 
argument, and in his private thinking he uses intellect to prove conclusions that are to him 
agreeable, rather than in a disinterested search for knowledge. There is something smug and 
unctuous about him, which reminds one of a bad type of cleric. His courage in the face of death 
would have been more remarkable if he had not believed that he was going to enjoy eternal bliss 
in the company of the gods. Unlike some of his predecessors, he was not scientific in his thinking, 


- 142 - 



but was determined to prove the universe agreeable to his ethical standards. This is treachery to 
truth, and the worst of philosophic sins. As a man, we may believe him admitted to the 
communion of saints; but as a philosopher he needs a long residence in a scientific purgatory. 

CHAPTER XVII Plato's Cosmogony 

P LATO'S cosmogony is set forth in the Timaeus, which was translated into Latin by Cicero, and 
was, in consequence, the only one of the dialogues that was known in the West in the Middle 
Ages. Both then, and earlier in Neoplatonism, it had more influence than anything else in Plato, 
which is curious, as it certainly contains more that is simply silly than is to be found in his other 
writings. As philosophy, it is unimportant, but historically it was so influential that it must be 
considered in some detail. 

The place occupied by Socrates in the earlier dialogues is taken, in the Timaeus, by a Pythagorean, 
and the doctrines of that school are in the main adopted, including the view that number is the 
explanation of the world. There is first a summary of the first five books of the Republic, then the 
myth of Atlantis, which is said to have been an island off the Pillars of Hercules, larger than Libya 
and Asia put together. Then Timaeus, who is a Pythagorean astronomer, preceeds to tell the 
history of the world down to the creation of man. What he says is, in outline, as follows. 

What is unchanging is apprehended by intelligence and reason; what is changing is apprehended 
by opinion. The world, being sensible, cannot be eternal, and must have been created by God. 
Since God is good, he made the world after the pattern of the eternal; being without jealousy, he 
wanted everything as like himself as possible. "God desired that all things should be good, and 
nothing bad, as far as possible." "Finding the whole visible sphere not at rest, but moving in an 
irregular and disorderly fashion, out of disorder he brought 


- 143 - 



order." (Thus it appears that Plato's God, unlike the Jewish and Christian God, did not create 
the world out of nothing, but rearranged pre-existing material.) He put intelligence in the soul, 
and the soul in the body. He made the world as a whole a living creature having soul and 
intelligence. There is only one world, not many, as various pre-Socratics had taught; there 
cannot be more than one, since it is a created copy designed to accord as closely as possible 
with the eternal original apprehended by God. The world in its entirety is one visible animal, 
comprehending within itself all other animals. It is a globe, because like is fairer than unlike, 
and only a globe is alike everywhere. It rotates, because circular motion is the most perfect; and 
since this is its only motion it needs no feet or hands. 

The four elements, fire, air, water, and earth, each of which apparently is represented by a 
number, are in continued proportion, i.e. fire is to air as air is to water and as water is to earth. 
God used all the elements in making the world, and therefore it is perfect, and not liable to old 
age or disease. It is hannonized by proportion, which causes it to have the spirit of friendship, 
and therefore to be indissoluble except by God. 

God made first the soul, then the body. The soul is compounded of the indivisible-unchangeable 
and the divisible-changeable; it is a third and intermediate kind of essence. 

Here follows a Pythagorean account of the planets, leading to an explanation of the origin of 
time: 

When the father and creator saw the creature which he had made moving and living, the created 
image of the eternal gods, he rejoiced, and in his joy determined to make the copy still more 
like the original; and as this was eternal, he sought to make the universe eternal, so far as might 
be. Now the nature of the ideal being was everlasting, but to bestow this attribute in its fulness 
upon a creature was impossible. Wherefore he resolved to have a moving image of eternity, and 
when he set in order the heaven, he made this image eternal but moving according to number, 
while eternity itself rests in unity; and this image we call Time. 

Before this, there were no days or nights. Of the eternal essence we must not say that it was or 
will be; only is is correct. It is implied 


* Vaughan must have been reading this passage when he wrote the poem beginning "I saw 
eternity the other night." 


- 144 - 


that of the "moving image of eternity" it is correct to say that it was and will be. 

Time and the heavens came into existence at the same instant. God made the sun so that animals 
could learn arithmetic— without the succession of days and nights, one supposes, we should not 
have thought of numbers. The sight of day and night, months and years, has created knowledge of 
number and given us the conception of time, and hence came philosophy. This is the greatest boon 
we owe to sight. 

There are (apart from the world as a whole) four kinds of animals: gods, birds, fishes, and land 
animals. The gods are mainly fire; the fixed stars are divine and eternal animals. The Creator told 
the gods that he could destroy them, but would not do so. He left it to them to make the mortal 
part of all other animals, after he had made the immortal and divine part. (This, like other 
passages about the gods in Plato, is perhaps not to be taken very seriously. At the beginning, 
Timaeus says he seeks only probability, and cannot be sure. Many details are obviously 
imaginative, and not meant literally.) 

The Creator, Timaeus says, made one soul for each star. Souls have sensation, love, fear, and 
anger; if they overcome these, they live righteously, but if not, not. If a man lives well, he goes, 
after death, to live happily for ever in his star. But if he lives badly, he will, in the next life, be a 
woman; if he (or she) persists in evil-doing, he (or she) will become a brute, and go on through 
transmigrations until at last reason conquers. God put some souls on earth, some on the moon, 
some on other planets and stars, and left it to the gods to fashion their bodies. 

There are two kinds of causes, those that are intelligent, and those that, being moved by others, 
are, in turn, compelled to move others. The former are endowed with mind, and are the workers of 
things fair and good, while the latter produce chance effects without order or design. Both sorts 
ought to be studied, for the creation is mixed, being made up of necessity and mind. (It will be 
observed that necessity is not subject to God's power.) Timaeus now proceeds to deal with the part 
contributed by necessity. 

Earth, air, fire, and water are not the first principles or letters or elements; they are not even 
syllables or first compounds. Fire, for instance, should not be called this, but such — that is to say, it 
is not a substance, but rather a state of substance. At this point, the question 


- 145 - 



is raised: Are intelligible essences only names? The answer turns, we are told, on whether mind is 
or is not the same thing as true opinion. If it is not, knowledge must be knowledge of essences, 
and therefore essences cannot be mere names. Now mind and true opinion certainly differ, for the 
one is implanted by instruction, the other by persuasion; one is accompanied by true reason, the 
other is not; all men share in true opinion, but mind is the attribute of the gods and of a very few 
among men. 

This leads to a somewhat curious theory of space, as something intennediate between the world of 
essence and the world of transient sensible things. 

There is one kind of being which is always the same, uncreated and indestructible, never receiving 
anything into itself from without, nor itself going out to any other, but invisible and imperceptible 
by any sense, and of which the contemplation is granted to intelligence only. And there is another 
nature of the same name with it, and like to it, perceived by sense, created, always in motion, 
becoming in place and again vanishing out of place, which is apprehended by opinion and sense. 
And there is a third nature, which is space, and is eternal, and admits not of destruction and 
provides a home for all created things, and is apprehended without the help of sense, by a kind of 
spurious reason, and is hardly real; which we beholding as in a dream, say of all existence that it 
must of necessity be in some place and occupy a space, but that what is neither in heaven nor on 
earth has no existence. 

This is a very difficult passage, which I do not pretend to understand at all fully. The theory 
expressed must, I think, have arisen from reflection on geometry, which appeared to be a matter of 
pure reason, like arithmetic, and yet had to do with space, which was an aspect of the sensible 
world. In general it is fanciful to find analogies with later philosophers, but I cannot help thinking 
that Kant must have liked this view of space, as one having an affinity with his own. 

The true elements of the material world, Timaeus says, are not earth, air, fire, and water, but two 
sorts of right-angled triangles, the one which is half a square and the one which is half an 
equilateral triangle. Originally everything was in confusion, and "the various elements had 
different places before they were arranged so as to form the universe." But then God fashioned 
them by form and number, 


- 146 - 



and "made them as far as possible the fairest and best, out of things which were not fair and 
good." The above two sorts of triangles, we are told, are the most beautiful forms, and therefore 
God used them in constructing matter. By means of these two triangles, it is possible to 
construct four of the five regular solids, and each atom of one of the four elements is a regular 
solid. Atoms of earth are cubes; of fire, tetrahedra; of air, octahedra; and of water, icosahedra. (I 
shall come to the dodecahedron presently.) 

The theory of the regular solids, which is set forth in the thirteenth book of Euclid, was, in 
Plato's day, a recent discovery; it was completed by Theaetetus, who appears as a very young 
man in the dialogue that bears his name. It was, according to tradition, he who first proved that 
there are only five kinds of regular solids, and discovered the octahedron and the icosahedron. * 
The regular tetrahedron, octahedron, and icosahedron, have equilateral triangles for their faces; 
the dodecahedron has regular pentagons, and cannot therefore be constructed out of Plato's two 
triangles. For this reason he does not use it in connection with the four elements. 

As for the dodecahedron, Plato says only "there was yet a fifth combination which God used in 
the delineation of the universe." This is obscure, and suggests that the universe is a 
dodecahedron; but elsewhere it is said to be a sphere. The pentagram has always been 
prominent in magic, and apparently owes this position to the Pythagoreans, who called it 

"Health" and used it as a symbol of recognition of members of the brotherhood. —It seems that 
it owed its properties to the fact that the dodecahedron has pentagons for its faces, and is, in 
some sense, a symbol of the universe. This topic is attractive, but it is difficult to ascertain 
much that is definite about it. 

After a discussion of sensation, Timaeus proceeds to explain the two souls in man, one 
immortal, the other mortal, one created by God, the other by the gods. The mortal soul is 
"subject to terrible and irresistible affections— first of all, pleasure, the greatest incitement to 
evil; then pain, which deters from good; also rashness and fear, two foolish counsellors, anger 
hard to be appeased, and hope easily led astray; these they (the gods) mingled with irrational 
sense and with all-daring love according to necessary laws, and so framed men." 


* See Heath, Greek Mathematics, Vol. I, pp. 159, 162, 294-6. 
a 

„ Heath, loc. cit., p. 161. 


- 147 - 


The immortal soul is in the head, the mortal in the breast. 

There is some curious physiology, as, that the purpose of the intestines is to prevent gluttony by 
keeping the food in, and then there is another account of transmigration. Cowardly or unrighteous 
men will, in the next life, be women. Innocent light-minded men, who think that astronomy can be 
leamt by looking at the stars without knowledge of mathematics, will become birds; those who 
have no philosophy will become wild land-animals; the very stupidest will become fishes. 

The last paragraph of the dialogue sums it up: 

We may now say that our discourse about the nature of the universe has an end. The world has 
received animals, mortal and immortal, and is fulfilled with them, and has become a visible 
animal containing the visible— the sensible God who is the image of the intellectual, the greatest, 
best, fairest, most perfect— the one onlybegotten heaven. 

It is difficult to know what to take seriously in the Timaeus, and what to regard as play of fancy. I 
think the account of the creation as bringing order out of chaos is to be taken quite seriously; so 
also is the proportion between the four elements, and their relation to the regular solids and their 
constituent triangles. The accounts of time and space are obviously what Plato believes, and so is 
the view of the created world as a copy of an eternal archetype. The mixture of necessity and 
purpose in the world is a belief common to practically all Greeks, long antedating the rise of 
philosophy; Plato accepted it, and thus avoided the problem of evil, which troubles Christian 
theology. I think his world-animal is seriously meant. But the details about transmigration, and the 
part attributed to the gods, and other inessentials, are, I think, only put in to give a possible 
concreteness. 

The whole dialogue, as I said before, deserves to be studied because of its great influence on 
ancient and medieval thought; and this influence is not confined to what is least fantastic. 


- 148 - 



CHAPTER XVIII Knowledge and Perception in Plato 

M OST modem men take it for granted that empirical knowledge is dependent upon, or derived 
from, perception. There is, however, in Plato and among philosophers of certain other schools, a 
very different doctrine, to the effect that there is nothing worthy to be called "knowledge" to be 
derived from the senses, and that the only real knowledge has to do with concepts. In this view, "2 
+ 2 = 4" is genuine knowledge, but such a statement as "snow is white" is so full of ambiguity and 
uncertainty that it cannot find a place in the philosopher's corpus of truths. 

This view is perhaps traceable to Parmenides, but in its explicit form the philosophic world owes 
it to Plato. I propose, in this chapter, to deal only with Plato's criticism of the view that knowledge 
is the same thing as perception, which occupies the first half of the Theaetetus. 

This dialogue is concerned to find a definition of "knowledge," but ends without arriving at any 
but a negative conclusion; several definitions are proposed and rejected, bur no definition that is 
considered satisfactory is suggested. 

The first of the suggested definitions, and the only one that I shall consider, is set forth by 
Theaetetus in the words: 

"It seems to me that one who knows something is perceiving the thing that he knows, and, so far 
as I can see at present, knowledge is nothing but perception." 

Socrates identifies this doctrine with that of Protagoras, that "man is the measure of all things," 
i.e. that any given thing "is to me such as it appears to me, and is to you such as it appears to you." 
Socrates adds: "Perception, then, is always something that is, and, as being knowledge, it is 
infallible." 

A large part of the argument that follows is concerned with the 


- 149 - 



characterization of perception; when once this is completed, it does not take long to prove that 
such a thing as perception has turned out to be cannot be knowledge. 

Socrates adds to the doctrine of Protagoras the doctrine of Heraclitus, that everything is always 
changing, i.e. that "all the things we are pleased to say ’are’ really are in process of becoming." 
Plato believes this to be true of objects of sense, but not of the objects of real knowledge. 
Throughout the dialogue, however, his positive doctrines remain in the background. 

From the doctrine of Heraclitus, even if it be only applicable to objects of sense, together with the 
definition of knowledge as perception, it follows that knowledge is of what becomes , not of what 
is. 

There are, at this point, some puzzles of a very elementary character. We are told that, since 6 is 
greater than 4 but less than 12, 6 is both great and small, which is a contradiction. Again, Socrates 
is now taller than Theaetetus, who is a youth not yet full grown; but in a few years Socrates will 
be shorter than Theaetetus. Therefore Socrates is both tall and short. The idea of a relational 
proposition seems to have puzzled Plato, as it did most of the great philosophers down to Hegel 
(inclusive). These puzzles, however, are not very germane to the argument, and may be ignored. 

Returning to perception, it is regarded as due to an interaction between the object and the sense- 
organ, both of which, according to the doctrine of Heraclitus, are always changing, and both of 
which, in changing, change the percept. Socrates remarks that when he is well he finds wine 
sweet, but when ill, sour. Here it is a change in the percipient that causes the change in the 
percept. 

Certain objections to the doctrine of Protagoras are advanced, and some of these are subsequently 
withdrawn. It is urged that Protagoras ought equally to have admitted pigs and baboons are 
measures of all things, since they also are percipients. Questions are raised as to the validity of 
perception in dreams and in madness. It is suggested that, if Protagoras is right, one man knows no 
more than another: not only is Protagoras as wise as the gods, but, what is more serious, he is no 
wiser than a fool. Further, if one man’s judgements are as correct as another's, the people who 
judge that Protagoras is mistaken have the same reason to be thought right as he has. 

Socrates undertakes to find an answer to many of these objections, 


- 150 - 



putting himself, for the moment, in the place of Protagoras. As for dreams, the percepts are true 
as percepts. As for the argument about pigs and baboons, this is dismissed as vulgar abuse. As 
for the argument that, if each man is the measure of all things, one man is as wise as another, 
Socrates suggests, on behalf of Protagoras, a very interesting answer, namely that, while one 
judgement cannot be truer than another, it can be better, in the sense of having better 
consequences. This suggests pragmatism. 

This answer, however, though Socrates has invented it, does not satisfy him. He urges, for 
example, that when a doctor foretells the course of my illness, he actually knows more of my 
future than I do. And when men differ as to what it is wise for the State to decree, the issue 
shows that some men had a greater knowledge as to the future than others had. Thus we cannot 
escape the conclusion that a wise man is a better measure of things than a fool. 

All these are objections to the doctrine that each man is the measure of all things, and only 
indirectly to the doctrine that "knowledge" means "perception," in so far as this doctrine leads 
to the other. There is, however, a direct argument, namely that memory must be allowed as well 
as perception. This is admitted, and to this extent the proposed definition is amended. 

We come next to criticisms of the doctrine of Heraclitus. This is first pushed to extremes, in 
accordance, we are told, with the practice of his disciples among the bright youths of Ephesus. 

A thing may change in two ways, by locomotion, and by a change of quality, and the doctrine of 

flux is held to state that everything is always changing in both respects. hk_And not only is 
everything always undergoing some qualitative change, but everything is always changing all its 
qualities— so, we are told, clever people think at Ephesus. This has 


* It was presumably this passage that first suggested to F. C. S. Schiller his admiration of 
Protagoras. 

a It seems that neither Plato nor the dynamic youths of Ephesus had noticed that locomotion 
£ is impossible on the extreme Heraclitean doctrine. Motion demands that a given thing A 
should be now here, now there; it must remain the same thing while it moves. In the 
doctrine that Plato examines there is change of quality and change of place, but not change 
of substance. In this respect, modern quantum physics goes further than the most extreme 
disciples of Heraclitus went in Plato's time. Plato would have thought this fatal to science, 
but it has not proved so. 


- 151 - 


awkward consequences. We cannot say "this is white," for if it was white when we began 
speaking it will have ceased to be white before we end our sentence. We cannot be right in 
saying we are seeing a thing, for seeing is perpetually changing into not-seeing. f_If everything 
is changing in every kind of way, seeing has no right to be called seeing rather than not-seeing, 
or perception to be called perception rather than not-perception. And when we say "perception 
is knowledge," we might just as well say "perception is not-knowledge." 

What the above argument amounts to is that, whatever else may be in perpetual flux, the 
meanings of words must be fixed, at least for a time, since otherwise no assertion is definite, 
and no assertion is true rather than false. There must be something more or less constant, if 
discourse and knowledge are to be possible. This, I think, should be admitted. But a great deal 
of flux is compatible with this admission. 

There is, at this point, a refusal to discuss Parmenides, on the ground that he is too great and 
grand. He is a "reverend and awful figure." "There was a sort of depth in him that was 
altogether noble." He is "one being whom I respect above all." In these remarks Plato shows his 
love for a static universe, and his dislike of the Heraclitean flux which he has been admitting for 
the sake of argument. But after this expression of reverence he abstains from developing the 
Parmenidean alternative to Heraclitus. 

We now reach Plato's final argument against the identification of knowledge with perception. 

He begins by pointing out that we perceive through eyes and ears, rather than with them, and he 
goes on to point out that some of our knowledge is not connected with any sense-organ. We can 
know, for instance, that sounds and colours are unlike, though no organ of sense can perceive 
both. There is no special organ for "existence and non-existence, likeness and unlikeness, 
sameness and differences, and also unity and numbers in general." The same applies to 
honourable and dishonourable, and good and bad. "The mind contemplates some things through 
its own instrumentality, others through the bodily faculties." We perceive hard and soft through 
touch, but it is the mind that judges that they exist and that they are contraries. Only the mind 
can reach existence, and we can- 


* Compare the advertisement: "That's Shell, that was." 

-152- 

not reach truth if we do not reach existence. It follows that we cannot know things through the 
senses alone, since through the senses alone we cannot know that things exist. Therefore 
knowledge consists in reflection, not in impressions, and perception is not knowledge, because 
it "has no part in apprehending truth, since it has none in apprehending existence. "To 
disentangle what can be accepted from what must be rejected in this argument against the 
identification of knowledge with perception is by no means easy. There are three inter- 
connected theses that Plato discusses, namely: 

1 . Knowledge is perception; 

2. Man is the measure of all things; 

3. Everything is in a state of flux. 


(1) The first of these, with which alone the argument is primarily concerned, is hardly discussed 
on its own account except in the final passage with which we have just been concerned. Here it 
is argued that comparison, knowledge of existence, and understanding of number, are essential 
to knowledge, but cannot be included in perception since they are not effected through any 
sense-organ. The things to be said about these are different. Let us begin with likeness and 
unlikeness. 

That two shades of colour, both of which I am seeing, are similar or dissimilar as the case may 
be, is something which I, for my part, should accept, not indeed as a "percept," but as a 
"judgement of perception." A percept, I should say, is not knowledge, but merely something 
that happens, and that belongs equally to the world of physics and to the world of psychology. 
We naturally think of perception, as Plato does, as a relation between a percipient and an object: 
we say "I see a table." But here "I" and "table" are logical constructions. The core of crude 
occurrence is merely certain patches of colour. These are associated with images of touch, they 
may cause words, and they may become a source of memories. The percept as filled out with 
images of touch becomes an "object," which is supposed physical; the percept as filled out with 
words and memories becomes a "perception," which is part of a "subject" and is considered 
mental. The percept is just an occurrence, and neither true nor false; the percept as filled out 
with words is a judgement, and capable of truth or falsehood. This 

- 153 - 



judgement I call a "judgement of perception." The proposition "knowledge is perception" must be 
interpreted as meaning "knowledge is judgements of perception." It is only in this form that it is 
grammatically capable of being correct. 

To return to likeness and unlikeness, it is quite possible, when I perceive two colours 
simultaneously, for their likeness or unlikeness to be part of the datum, and to be asserted in a 
judgement of perception. Plato's argument that we have no sense-organ for perceiving likeness 
and unlikeness ignores the cortex, and assumes that all senseorgans must be at the surface of the 
body. 

The argument for including likeness and unlikeness as possible perceptive data is as follows. Let 
us assume that we see two shades of colour A and B, and that we judge "A is like B." Let us 
assume further, as Plato does, that such a judgement is in general correct, and, in particular, is 
correct in the case we are considering. There is, then, a relation of likeness between A and B, and 
not merely a judgement on our part asserting likeness. If there were only our judgement, it would 
be an arbitrary judgement, incapable of truth or falsehood. Since it obviously is capable of truth or 
falsehood, the likeness can subsist between A and B, and cannot be merely something "mental." 
The judgement "A is like B" is true (if it is true) in virtue of a "fact," just as much as the 
judgement "A is red" or "A is round." The mind is no more involved in the perception of likeness 
than in the perception of colour. 

I come now to existence, on which Plato lays great stress. We have, he says, as regards sound and 
colour, a thought which includes both at once, namely that they exist. Existence belongs to 
everything, and is among the things that the mind apprehends by itself; without reaching 
existence, it is impossible to reach truth. 

The argument against Plato here is quite different from that in the case of likeness and unlikeness. 
The argument here is that all that Plato says about existence is bad grammar, or rather bad syntax. 
This point is important, not only in connection with Plato, but also with other matters such as the 
ontological argument for the existence of the Deity. 

Suppose you say to a child "lions exist, but unicorns don't," you can prove your point so far as 
lions are concerned by taking him to the Zoo and saying "look, that's a lion." You will not, unless 
you are a 


- 154 - 



philosopher, add: "And you can see that that exists." If, being a philosopher, you do add this, 
you are uttering nonsense. To say "lions exist" means "there are lions," i.e. ”'x is a lion’ is true 
for a suitable x." But we cannot say of the suitable x that it "exists"; we can only apply this verb 
to a description, complete or incomplete. "Lion" is an incomplete description, because it applies 
to many objects: "The largest lion in the Zoo" is complete, because it applies to only one object. 

Now suppose that I am looking at a bright red patch. I may say "this is my present percept"; I 
may also say "my present percept exists"; but I must not say "this exists," because the word 
"exists" is only significant when applied to a description as opposed to a name.* This disposes 
of existence as one of the things that the mind is aware of in objects. 

I come now to understanding of numbers. Here there are two very different things to be 
considered: on the one hand, the propositions of arithmetic, and on the other hand, empirical 
propositions of enumeration. "2 + 2 = 4" is of the former kind; "I have ten fingers" is of the 
latter. 

I should agree with Plato that arithmetic, and pure mathematics generally, is not derived from 
perception. Pure mathematics consists of tautologies, analogous to "men are men," but usually 
more complicated. To know that a mathematical proposition is correct, we do not have to study 
the world, but only the meanings of the symbols; and the symbols, when we dispense with 
definitions (of which the purpose is merely abbreviation), are found to be such words as "or" 
and "not," and "all" and "some," which do not, like "Socrates," denote anything in the actual 
world. A mathematical equation asserts that two groups of symbols have the same meaning; and 
so long as we confine ourselves to pure mathematics, this meaning must be one that can be 
understood without knowing anything about what can be perceived. Mathematical truth, 
therefore, is, as Plato contends, independent of perception; but it is truth of a very peculiar sort, 
and is concerned only with symbols. 

Propositions of enumeration, such as "I have ten fingers," are in quite a different category, and 
are obviously, at least in part, dependent 


* On this subject see the last chapter of the present work. 


- 155 - 



on perception. Clearly the concept "finger" is abstracted from perception; but how about the 
concept "ten"? Here we may seem to have arrived at a true universal or Platonic idea. We cannot 
say that "ten" is abstracted from perception, for any percept which can be viewed as ten of some 
kind of thing can equally well be viewed otherwise. Suppose I give the name "digitary" to all the 
fingers of one hand taken together; then I can say "I have two digitaries," and this describes the 
same fact of perception as I formerly described by the help of the number ten. Thus in the 
statement "I have ten fingers" perception plays a smaller part, and conception a larger part, than in 
such a statement as "this is red." The matter, however, is only one of degree. 

The complete answer, as regards propositions in which the word "ten" occurs, is that, when these 
propositions are correctly analysed, they are found to contain no constituent corresponding to the 
word "ten." To explain this in the case of such a large number as ten would be complicated; let us, 
therefore, substitute "I have two hands." This means: 

"There is an a such that there is a b such that a and b are not identical and whatever x may be, 'x is 
a hand of mine' is true when, and only when, x is a or x is b." 

Here the word "two" does not occur. It is true that two letters a and b occur, but we do not need to 
know that they are two, any more than we need to know that they are black, or white, or whatever 
colour they may happen to be. 

Thus numbers are, in a certain precise sens q, formal. The facts which verify various propositions 
asserting that various collections each have two members, have in common, not a constituent, but 
a fonn. In this they differ from propositions about the Statue of Liberty, or the moon, or George 
Washington. Such propositions refer to a particular portion of space-time; it is this that is in 
common between all the statements that can be made about the Statue of Liberty. But there is 
nothing in common among propositions "there are two soand-so's" except a common fonn. The 
relation of the symbol "two" to the meaning of a proposition in which it occurs is far more 
complicated than the relation of the symbol "red" to the meaning of a proposition in which it 
occurs. We may say, in a certain sense, that the symbol "two" means nothing, for, when it occurs 
in a true state- 


- 156 - 



ment, there is no corresponding constituent in the meaning of the statement. We may continue, if 
we like, to say that numbers are eternal, immutable, and so on, but we must add that they are 
logical fictions. 

There is a further point. Concerning sound and colour, Plato says "both together are two, and each 
of them is one." We have considered the two', now we must consider the one. There is here a 
mistake very analogous to that concerning existence. The predicate "one" is not applicable to 
things, but only to unit classes. We can say "the earth has one satellite," but it is a syntactical error 
to say "the moon is one." For what can such an assertion mean? You may just as well say "the 
moon is many," since it has many parts. To say "the earth has one satellite" is to give a property of 
the concept "earth's satellite," namely the following property: 

"There is a c such that 'x is a satellite of the earth’ is true when, and only when, x is c." 

This is an astronomical truth; but if, for "a satellite of the earth," you substitute "the moon" or any 
other proper name, the result is either meaningless or a mere tautology. "One," therefore, is a 
property of certain concepts, just as "ten" is a property of the concept "my finger." But to argue 
"the earth has one satellite, namely the moon, therefore the moon is one" is as bad as to argue "the 
Apostles were twelve; Peter was an apostle; therefore Peter was twelve," which would be valid if 
for "twelve" we substituted "white." 

The above considerations have shown that, while there is a fonnal kind of knowledge, namely 
logic and mathematics, which is not derived from perception, Plato's arguments as regards all 
other knowledge are fallacious. This does not, of course, prove that his conclusion is false; it 
proves only that he has given no valid reason for supposing it true. 

(2) I come now to the position of Protagoras, that man is the measure of all things, or, as it is 
interpreted, that each man is the measure of all things. Here it is essential to decide the level upon 
which the discussion is to proceed. It is obvious that, to begin with, we must distinguish between 
percepts and inferences. Among percepts, each man is inevitably confined to his own; what he 
knows of the percepts of others he knows by inference from his own percepts in hearing and 
reading. The percepts of dreamers and madmen, as 


- 157 - 



percepts, are just as good as those of others; the only objection to them is that, as their context is 
unusual, they are apt to give rise to fallacious inferences. 


But how about inferences? Are they equally personal and private? In a sense, we must admit that 
they are. What I am to believe, I must believe because of some reason that appeals to me. It is true 
that my reason may be some one else's assertion, but that may be a perfectly adequate reason— for 
instance, if I am a judge listening to evidence. And however Protagorean I may be, it is reasonable 
to accept the opinion of an accountant about a set of figures in preference to my own, for I may 
have repeatedly found that if, at first, I disagree with him, a little more care shows me that he was 
right. In this sense I may admit that another man is wiser than I am. The Protagorean position, 
rightly interpreted, does not involve the view that I never make mistakes, but only that the 
evidence of my mistakes must appear to me. My past self can be judged just as another person can 
be judged. But all this presupposes that, as regards inferences as opposed to percepts, there is 
some impersonal standard of correctness. If any inference that I happen to draw is just as good as 
any other, then the intellectual anarchy that Plato deduces from Protagoras does in fact follow. On 
this point, therefore, which is an important one, Plato seems to be in the right. But the empiricist 
would say that perceptions are the test of correctness in inference in empirical material. 

(3) The doctrine of universal flux is caricatured by Plato, and it is difficult to suppose that any one 
ever held it in the extreme fonn that he gives to it. Let us suppose, for example, that the colours 
we see are continually changing. Such a word as "red" applies to many shades of colour, and if we 
say "I see red," there is no reason why this should not remain true throughout the time that it takes 
to say it. Plato gets his results by applying to processes of continuous change such logical 
oppositions as perceiving and not-perceiving, knowing and not-knowing. Such oppositions, 
however, are not suitable for describing such processes. Suppose, on a foggy day, you watch a 
man walking away from you along a road: he grows dimmer and dimmer, and there comes a 
moment when you are sure that you no longer see him, but there is an intennediate period of 
doubt. Logical oppositions have been invented for our convenience, but continuous change 
requires a quantitative apparatus, the possibility of which Plato 


- 158 - 



ignores. What he says on this subject, therefore, is largely beside the mark. 

At the same time, it must be admitted that, unless words, to some extent, had fixed meanings, 
discourse would be impossible. Here again, however, it is easy to be too absolute. Words do 
change their meanings; take, for example, the word "idea." It is only by a considerable process of 
education that we learn to give to this word something like the meaning which Plato gave to it. It 
is necessary that the changes in the meanings of words should be slower than the changes that the 
words describe; but it is not necessary that there should be no changes in the meanings of words. 
Perhaps this does not apply to the abstract words of logic and mathematics, but these words, as we 
have seen, apply only to the form, not to the matter, of propositions. Here, again, we find that 
logic and mathematics are peculiar. Plato, under the influence of the Pythagoreans, assimilated 
other knowledge too much to mathematics. He shared this mistake with many of the greatest 
philosophers, but it was a mistake none the less. 

CHAPTER XIX Aristotle's Metaphysics 

IN reading any important philosopher, but most of all in reading Aristotle, it is necessary to study 
him in two ways: with reference to his predecessors, and with reference to his successors. In the 
former aspect, Aristotle's merits are enormous; in the latter, his demerits are equally enonnous. 

For his demerits, however, his successors are more responsible than he is. He came at the end of 
the creative period in Greek thought, and after his death it was two thousand years before the 
world produced any philosopher who could be regarded as approximately his equal. Towards the 
end of this long period his authority had become almost as unquestioned as that of the Church, 
and in science, as well as in philosophy, had become a serious obstacle to progress. Ever since the 
beginning of 

- 159 - 



the seventeenth century, almost every serious intellectual advance has had to begin with an 
attack on some Aristotelian doctrine; in logic, this is still true at the present day. But it would 
have been at least as disastrous if any of his predecessors (except perhaps Democritus) had 
acquired equal authority. To do him justice, we must, to begin with, forget his excessive 
posthumous fame, and the equally excessive posthumous condemnation to which it led. 

Aristotle was born, probably in 384 B.C., at Stagyra in Thrace. His father had inherited the 
position of family physician to the king of Macedonia. At about the age of eighteen Aristotle 
came to Athens and became a pupil of Plato; he remained in the Academy for nearly twenty 
years, until the death of Plato in 348-7 B.C. He then travelled for a time, and married either the 
sister or the niece of a tyrant named Hermias. ( Scandal said she was the daughter or concubine 
of Hermias, but both stories are disproved by the fact that he was a eunuch.) In 343 B.C. he 
became tutor to Alexander, then thirteen years old, and continued in that position until, at the 
age of sixteen, s was pronounced by his father to be of age, and was appointed regent during 
Philip's absence. Everything one would wish to know of the relations of Aristotle and 
Alexander is unascertainable, the more so as legends were soon invented on the subject. There 
are letters between them which are generally regarded as forgeries. People who admire both 
men suppose that the tutor influenced the pupil. Hegel thinks that Alexander's career shows the 
practical usefulness of philosophy. As to this, A. W. Benn says: "It would be unfortunate if 
philosophy had no better testimonial to show for herself than the character of Alexander. . . . 
Arrogant, drunken, cruel, vindictive, and grossly superstitious, he united the vices of a Highland 
chieftain to the frenzy of an Oriental despot." 

For my part, while I agree with Benn about the character of Alexander, I nevertheless think that 
his work was enormously important and enormously beneficial, since, but for him, the whole 
tradition of Hellenic civilization might well have perished. As to Aristotle's influence on him, 
we are left free to conjecture whatever seems to us most plausible. For my part, I should 
suppose it nil. Alexander was an ambitious and passionate boy, on bad terms with his father, 
and 


* The Greek Philosophers, Vol. I, p. 285. 


- 160 - 


presumably impatient of schooling. Aristotle thought no State should have as many as one 
hundred thousand citizens, jland preached the doctrine of the golden mean. I cannot imagine 
his pupil regarding him as anything but a prosy old pedant, set over him by his father to keep 
him out of mischief. Alexander, it is true, had a certain snobbish respect for Athenian 
civilization, but this was common to his whole dynasty, who wished to prove that they were not 
barbarians. It was analogous to the feeling of nineteenth-century Russian aristocrats for Paris. 
This, therefore, was not attributable to Aristotle's influence. And I do not see anything else in 
Alexander that could possibly have come from this source. 

It is more surprising that Alexander had so little influence on Aristotle, whose speculations on 
politics were blandly oblivious of the fact that the era of City States had given way to the era of 
empires. I suspect that Aristotle, to the end, thought of him as "that idle and headstrong boy, 
who never could understand anything of philosophy." On the whole, the contacts of these two 
great men seem to have been as unfruitful as if they had lived in different worlds. 

From 335 B.C. to 323 B.C. (in which latter year Alexander died), Aristotle lived at Athens. It 
was during these twelve years that he founded his school and wrote most of his books. At the 
death of Alexander, the Athenians rebelled, and turned on his friends, including Aristotle, who 
was indicted for impiety, but, unlike Socrates, fled to avoid punishment. In the next year ( 322) 
he died. 

Aristotle, as a philosopher, is in many ways very different from all his predecessors. He is the 
first to write like a professor: his treatises are systematic, his discussions are divided into heads, 
he is a professional teacher, not an inspired prophet. His work is critical, careful, pedestrian, 
without any trace of Bacchic enthusiasm. The Orphic elements in Plato are watered down in 
Aristotle, and mixed with a strong dose of common sense; where he is Platonic, one feels that 
his natural temperament has been overpowered by the teaching to which he has been subjected. 
He is not passionate, or in any profound sense religious. The errors of his predecessors were the 
glorious errors of youth attempting the impossible; his errors are those of age which cannot free 
itself of habitual prejudices. He is best in 


Ethics, 1170^. 


- 161 - 


detail and in criticism; he fails in large construction, for lack of fundamental clarity and Titanic 
fire. 

It is difficult to decide at what point to begin an account of Aristotle's metaphysics, but perhaps 
the best place is his criticism of the theory of ideas and his own alternative doctrine of universals. 
He advances against the ideas a number of very good arguments, most of which are already to be 
found in Plato Parmenides . The strongest argument is that of the "third man": if a man is a man 
because he resembles the ideal man, there must be a still more ideal man to whom both ordinary 
men and the ideal man are similar. Again, Socrates is both a man and an animal, and the question 
arises whether the ideal man is an ideal animal; if he is, there must be as many ideal animals as 
there are species of animals. It is needless to pursue the matter; Aristotle makes it obvious that, 
when a number of individuals share a predicate, this cannot be because of relation to something of 
the same kind as themselves, but more ideal. This much may be taken as proved, but Aristotle’s 
own doctrine is far from clear. It was this lack of clarity that made possible the medieval 
controversy between nominalists and realists. 

Aristotle's metaphysics, roughly speaking, may be described as Plato diluted by common sense. 

He is difficult because Plato and common sense do not mix easily. When one tries to understand 
him, one thinks part of the time that he is expressing the ordinary views of a person innocent of 
philosophy, and the rest of the time that he is setting forth Platonism with a new vocabulary. It 
does not do to lay too much stress on any single passage, because there is liable to be a correction 
or modification of it in some later passage. On the whole, the easiest way to understand both his 
theory of universals and his theory of matter and form is to set forth first the common-sense 
doctrine which is half of his view, and then to consider the Platonic modifications to which he 
subjects it. 

Up to a certain point, the theory of universals is quite simple. In language, there are proper names, 
and there are adjectives. The proper names apply to "things" or "persons," each of which is the 
only thing or person to which the name in question applies. The sun, the moon, France, Napoleon, 
are unique; there are not a number of instances of things to which these names apply. On the other 
hand, words like "cat," "dog," "man" apply to many different things. The 


- 162 - 



problem of universals is concerned with the meanings of such words, and also of adjectives, 
such as "white," "hard," "round," and so on. He says:* "By the term ’universal’ I mean that 
which is of such a nature as to be predicated of many subjects, by ’individual’ that which is not 
thus predicated." 

What is signified by a proper name is a "substance," while what is signified by an adjective or 
class-name, such as "human" or "man," is called a "universal." A substance is a "this," but a 
universal is a "such"— it indicates the sort of thing, not the actual particular thing. A universal is 
not a substance, because it is not a "this." ( Plato's heavenly bed would be a "this" to those who 
could perceive it; this is a matter as to which Aristotle disagrees with Plato.) "It seems 
impossible," Aristotle says, "that any universal tenn should be the name of a substance. For . . . 
the substance of each thing is that which is peculiar to it, which does not belong to anything 
else; but the universal is common, since that is called universal which is such as to belong to 
more than one thing." The gist of the matter, so far, is that a universal cannot exist by itself, but 
only in particular things. 

Superficially, Aristotle's doctrine is plain enough. Suppose I say "there is such a thing as the 
game of football," most people would regard the remark as a truism. But if I were to infer that 
football could exist without football-players, I should be rightly held to be talking nonsense. 
Similarly, it would be held, there is such a thing as parenthood, but only because there are 
parents; there is such a thing as sweetness, but only because there are sweet things; and there is 
redness, but only because there are red things. And this dependence is thought to be not 
reciprocal: the men who play football would still exist even if they never played football; things 
which are usually sweet may turn sour; and my face, which is usually red, may turn pale without 
ceasing to be my face. In this way we are led to conclude that what is meant by an adjective is 
dependent for its being on what is meant by a proper name, but not vice versa. This is, I think, 
what Aristotle means. His doctrine on this point, as on many others, is a common-sense 
prejudice pedantically expressed. 

But it is not easy to give precision to the theory. Granted that football could not exist without 
football-players, it could perfectly well 


On Interpretation, 1 l a . 


- 163 - 



exist without this or that football-player. And granted that a person can exist without playing 
football, he nevertheless cannot exist without doing something. The quality redness cannot exist 
without some subject, but it can exist without this or that subject; similarly a subject cannot exist 
without some quality, but can exist without this or that quality. The supposed ground for the 
distinction between things and qualities thus seems to be illusory. 

The true ground of the distinction is, in fact, linguistic; it is derived from syntax. There are proper 
names, adjectives, and relationwords; we may say "John is wise, James is foolish, John is taller 
than James." Here "John" and "James" are proper names, "wise" and "foolish" are adjectives, and 
"taller" is a relation- word. Metaphysicians, ever since Aristotle, have interpreted these syntactical 
differences metaphysically: John and James are substances, wisdom and folly are universals. 
(Relation-words were ignored or misinterpreted.) It may be that, given sufficient care, 
metaphysical differences can be found that have some relation to these syntactical differences, but, 
if so, it will be only by means of a long process, involving, incidentally, the creation of an 
artificial philosophical language. And this language will contain no such names as "John" and 
"James," and no such adjectives as "wise" and "foolish"; all the words of ordinary languages will 
have yielded to analysis, and been replaced by words having a less complex significance. Until 
this labour has been performed, the question of particulars and universals cannot be adequately 
discussed. And when we reach the point at which we can at last discuss it, we shall find that the 
question we are discussing is quite quite different from what we supposed it to be at the outset. 

If, therefore, I have failed to make Aristotle's theory of universals clear, that is (I maintain) 
because it is not clear. But it is certainly an advance on the theory of ideas, and is certainly 
concerned with a genuine and very important problem. 

There is another term which is important in Aristotle and in his scholastic followers, and that is 
the term "essence." This is by no means synonymous with "universal." Your "essence" is "what 
you are by your very nature." It is, one may say, those of your properties which you cannot lose 
without ceasing to be yourself. Not only an individual thing, but a species, has an essence. The 
definition of a species should consist in mentioning its essence. I shall return to the conception of 


- 164 - 



"essence" in connection with Aristotle's logic. For the present I will merely observe that it seems 
to me a muddle-headed action, incapable of precision. 

The next point in Aristotle’s metaphysics is the distinction of "form" and "matter." (It must be 
understood that "matter," in the sense in which it is opposed to "form," is different from "matter" 
as opposed to "mind.") 

Here, again, there is a common-sense basis for Aristotle's theory, but here, more than in the case 
of universals, the Platonic modifications are very important. We may start with a marble statue; 
here marble is the matter, while the shape conferred by the sculptor is the fonn. Or, to take 
Aristotle's examples, if a man makes a bronze sphere, bronze is the matter, and sphericity is the 
form; while in the case of a calm sea, water is the matter and smoothness is the form. So far, all is 
simple. 

He goes on to say that it is in virtue of the form that the matter is some one definite thing, and this 
is the substance of the thing. What Aristotle means seems to be plain common sense: a "thing" 
must be bounded, and the boundary constitutes its form. Take, say, a volume of water: any part of 
it can be marked off from the rest by being enclosed in a vessel, and then this part becomes a 
"thing," but so long as the part is in no way marked out from the rest of the homogeneous mass it 
is not a "thing." A statue is a "thing," and the marble of which it is composed is, in a sense, 
unchanged from what it was as part of a lump or as part of the contents of a quarry. We should not 
naturally say that it is the fonn that confers substantiality, but that is because the atomic 
hypothesis is ingrained in our imagination. Each atom, however, if it is a "thing," is so in virtue of 
its being delimited from other atoms, and so having, in some sense, a "form." 

We now come to a new statement, which at first sight seems difficult. The soul, we are told, is the 
form of the body. Here it is clear that "form" does not mean "shape." I shall return later to the 
sense in which the soul is the fonn of the body; for the present, I will only observe that, in 
Aristotle's system, the soul is what makes the body one thing, having unity of purpose, and the 
characteristics that we associate with the word "organism." The purpose of an eye is to see, but it 
cannot see when parted from its body. In fact, it is the soul that sees. 

It would seem, then, that "form" is what gives unity to a portion 


- 165 - 



of matter, and that this unity is usually, if not always, teleological. But "form" turns out to be 
much more than this, and the more is very difficult. 

The form of a thing, we are told, is its essence and primary substance. Forms are substantial, 
although universals are not. When a man makes a brazen sphere, both the matter and the form 
already existed, and all that he does is to bring them together; the man does not make the form, 
any more than he makes the brass. Not everything has matter; there are eternal things, and these 
have no matter, except those of them that are movable in space. Things increase in actuality by 
acquiring fonn; matter without form is only a potentiality. 

The view that forms are substances, which exist independently of the matter in which they are 
exemplified, seems to expose Aristotle to his own arguments against Platonic ideas. A form is 
intended by him to be something quite different from a universal, but it has many of the same 
characteristics. Form is, we are told, more real than matter; this is reminiscent of the sole reality 
of the ideas. The change that Aristotle makes in Plato's metaphysic is, it would seem, less than 
he represents it as being. This view is taken by Zeller, who, on the question of matter and form, 
says: 

The final explanation of Aristotle's want of clearness on this subject is, however, to be found in 
the fact that he had only half emancipated himself, as we shall see, from Plato's tendency to 
hypostatise ideas. The 'Forms' had for him, as the 'Ideas' had for Plato, a metaphysical existence 
of their own, as conditioning all individual things. And keenly as he followed the growth of 
ideas out of experience, it is none the less true that these ideas, especially at the point where 
they are farthest removed from experience and immediate perception, are metamorphosed in the 
end from a logical product of human thought into an immediate presentment of a supersensible 
world, and the object, in that sense, of an intellectual intuition. 

I do not see how Aristotle could have found a reply to this criticism. 

The only answer that I can imagine would be one that maintained that no two things could have 
the same form. If a man makes two brass spheres (we should have to say), each has its own 
special 


* Aristotle, Vol. I, p. 204. 


- 166 - 


sphericity, which is substantial and particular, an instance of the universal "sphericity," but not 
identical with it. I do not think the language of the passages I quoted would readily support this 
interpretation. And it would be open to the objection that the particular sphericity would, on 
Aristotle's view, be unknowable, whereas it is of the essence of his metaphysics that, as there 
comes to be more of form and less of matter, things become gradually more knowable. This is 
only consistent with the rest of his views if the form can be embodied in many particular things. If 
he were to say that there are as many forms that are instances of sphericity as there are spherical 
things, he would have to make very radical alterations in his philosophy. For instance, his view 
that a form is identical with its essence is incompatible with the above suggested escape. 

The doctrine of matter and form in Aristotle is connected with the distinction of potentiality and 
actuality. Bare matter is conceived as a potentiality of fonn; all change is what we should call 
"evolution," in the sense that after the change the thing in question has more form than before. 
That which has more fonn is considered to be more "actual." God is pure form and pure actuality; 
in Him, therefore, there can be no change. It will be seen that this doctrine is optimistic and 
teleological: the universe and everything in it is developing towards something continually better 
than what went before. 

The concept of potentiality is convenient in some connections, provided it is so used that we can 
translate our statements into a form in which the concept is absent. "A block of marble is a 
potential statue" means "from a block of marble, by suitable acts, a statue is produced." But when 
potentiality is used as a fundamental and irreducible concept, it always conceals confusion of 
thought. Aristotle's use of it is one of the bad points in his system. 

Aristotle's theology is interesting, and closely connected with the rest of his metaphysics— indeed, 
"theology" is one of his names for what we call "metaphysics." (The book which we know under 
that name was not so called by him.) 

There are, he says, three kinds of substances: those that are sensible and perishable, those that are 
sensible but not perishable, and those that are neither sensible nor perishable. The first class 
includes plants and animals, the second includes the heavenly bodies (which Aristotle 


- 167 - 



believed to undergo no change except motion), the third includes the rational soul in man, and 
also God. 


The main argument for God is the First Cause: there must be something which originates motion, 
and this something must itself be unmoved, and must be eternal, substance, and actuality. The 
object of desire and the object of thought, Aristotle says, cause movement in this way, without 
themselves being in motion. So God produces motion by being loved, whereas every other cause 
of motion works by being itself in motion (like a billiard ball). God is pure thought; for thought is 
what is best. "Life also belongs to God; for the actuality of thought is life, and God is that 
actuality; and God's self-dependent actuality is life most good and eternal. We say therefore that 
God is a living being, eternal, most good, so that life and duration continuous and eternal belong 

to God; for this is God" (1072^). 

"It is clear then from what has been said that there is a substance which is eternal and unmovable 
and separate from sensible things. It has been shown that this substance cannot have any 
magnitude, but is without parts and indivisible. . . . But it has also been shown that it is impassive 

and unalterable; for all the other changes are posterior to change of place" (1073 a ). 

God does not have the attributes of a Christian Providence, for it would derogate from His 
perfection to think about anything except what is perfect, i.e. Himself. "It must be of itself that the 
divine thought thinks (since it is the most excellent of things), and its thinking is a thinking on 

thinking." (1074^). We must infer that God does not know of the existence of our sublunary 
world. Aristotle, like Spinoza, holds that, while men must love God, it is impossible that God 
should love men. 

God is not definable as "the unmoved mover." On the contrary, astronomical considerations lead 

to the conclusion that there are either forty-seven or fifty-five unmoved movers (1074 a ). The 
relation of these to God is not made clear; indeed the natural interpretation would be that there are 
forty-seven or fifty-five gods. For after one of the above passages on God Aristotle proceeds: "We 
must not ignore the question whether we are to suppose one such substance or more than one," 
and at once embarks upon the argument that leads to the fortyseven or fifty-five unmoved movers. 

The conception of an unmoved mover is a difficult one. To a mod- 


- 168 - 



ern mind, it would seem that the cause of a change must be a previous change, and that, if the 
universe were ever wholly static, it would remain so eternally. To understand what Aristotle 
means, we must take account of what he says about causes. There are, according to him, four 
kinds of causes, which were called, respectively, material, fonnal, efficient, and final. Let us take 
again the man who is making a statue. The material cause of the statue is the marble, the formal 
cause is the essence of the statue to be produced, the efficient cause is the contact of the chisel 
with the marble, and the final cause is the end that the sculptor has in view. In modern 
tenninology, the word "cause" would be confined to the efficient cause. The unmoved mover may 
be regarded as a final cause: it supplies a purpose for change, which is essentially an evolution 
towards likeness with God. 

I said that Aristotle was not by temperament deeply religious, but this is only partly true. One 
could, perhaps, interpret one aspect of his religion, somewhat freely, as follows: 

God exists eternally, as pure thought, happiness, complete selffulfilment, without any unrealized 
purposes. The sensible world, on the contrary, is imperfect, but it has life, desire, thought of an 
imperfect kind, and aspiration. All living things are in a greater or less degree aware of God, and 
are moved to action by admiration and love of God. Thus God is the final cause of all activity. 
Change consists in giving form to matter, but, where sensible things are concerned, a substratum 
of matter always remains. Only God consists of form without matter. The world is continually 
evolving towards a greater degree of fonn, and thus becoming progressively more like God. But 
the process cannot be completed, because matter cannot be wholly eliminated. This is a religion of 
progress and evolution, for God's static perfection moves the world only through the love that 
finite beings feel for Him. Plato was mathematical, Aristotle was biological; this accounts for the 
differences in their religions. 

This would, however, be a one-sided view of Aristotle's religion; he has also the Greek love of 
static perfection and preference for contemplation rather than action. His doctrine of the soul 
illustrates this aspect of his philosophy. 

Whether Aristotle taught immortality in any form, or not, was a vexed question among 
commentators. Averroes, who held that he did not, had followers in Christian countries, of whom 
the more 


- 169 - 



extreme were called Epicureans, and whom Dante found in hell. In fact, Aristotle's doctrine is 
complex, and easily lends itself to misunderstandings. In his book On the Soul, he regards the soul 

as bound up with the body, and ridicules the Pythagorean doctrine of transmigration (407^). The 
soul, it seems, perishes with the body: "it indubitably follows that the soul is inseparable from its 

body" (413 a ); but he immediately adds: "or at any rate certain parts of it are." Body and soul are 
related as matter and form: "the soul must be a substance in the sense of the form of a material 
body having life potentially within it. But substance is actuality, and thus soul is the actuality of a 

body as above characterized" (412 a ). Soul "is substance in the sense which corresponds to the 
definitive formula of a thing's essence. That means that it is the 'essential whatness' of a body of 

the character just assigned" (i.e. having life) (412^). "The soul is the first grade of actuality of a 
natural body having life potentially in it. The body so described is a body which is organized 

(4 1 2 a ). To ask whether soul and body are one is as meaningless as to ask whether the wax and the 
shape given it by the stamp are one (412^). Self-nutrition is the only psychic power possessed by 
plants (413 a ). The soul is the final cause of the body (414°). 

In this book, he distinguishes between "soul" and "mind," making mind higher than soul, and less 
bound to the body. After speaking of the relation of soul and body, he says: "The case of mind is 
different; it seems to be an independent substance implanted within the soul and to be incapable of 

being destroyed" (408^). Again: "We have no evidence as yet about mind or the power to think; it 
seems to be a widely different kind of soul, differing as what is eternal from what is perishable; it 
alone is capable of existence in isolation from all other psychic powers. All the other parts of soul, 
it is evident from what we have said, are, in spite of certain statements to the contrary, incapable 

of separate existence" (413^). The mind is the part of us that understands mathematics and 
philosophy; its objects are timeless, and therefore it is regarded as itself timeless. The soul is what 
moves the body and perceives sensible objects; it is characterized by self-nutrition, sensation, 

thinking, and motivity (413^); but the mind has the higher function of thinking, which has no 
relation to the body or to the senses. Hence the mind can be immortal, though the rest of the soul 
cannot. 


- 170 - 



To understand Aristotle's doctrine of the soul, we must remember that the soul is the "form" of the 
body, and that spatial shape is one kind of "form." What is there in common is hte conferring of 
unity upon a certain amount of matter. The part of a block of marble which afterwards becomes a 
statue is, as yet, not sparated from the rest of the marble; it is not yet a "thing," and has not yet any 
unity. After the sculptor has made the statue, it has unity, which it derives from its shape. Now the 
esential feature of the soul, in virtue of which it is the "form" of the body, is that it makes the body 
an organic whole, having purposes as a unit. A single organ has purposes lying outside itself; the 
eye, in isolation, cannot see. Thus many things can be said in which an animal or plant as a whole 
is the subject, which cannot be said about any part of it. It is in this sense that organization, or 
form, confers substantiality. That which confers substantiality upon a plant or animal is what 
Aristotle calls it "soul." But "mind" is something different, less intimately bound up with the 
body; perhaps it is a part of the soul, but it is possessed by only a small minority of living beings 

(415°). Mind as speculation cannot be the cause of movement, for it never thinks about what is 
practicable, and never says what is to be avoided or what pursued (432^). 

A similar doctrine, though with a slight change of terminology, is set forth in the Nicomachean 
Ethics. There is in the soul one element that is rational, and that is irrational. The irrational part is 
twofold: the vegetative, which is found in everything living, even in plants, and the appetitive, 

which exists in all animals (1102^). The life of the rational soul consists in contemplation, which 
is the completehappiness of man, though not fully attainable. "Such a life would be too high for 
man; for it is not in so far as he is man that he will live so, but in so far as something divine is 
present in him; and by so much as this is superior to our composite nature is its activity superior to 
that which is the exercise of the other kind of virtue (the practical kind). If reason is divine, then, 
in comparison with man, the life in accordance with it is divine in comparison in human life. But 
we must not follow those who advise us, being men, to think of human things, and being mortal, 
of mortal things, but must, so far as we can, make ourselves immortal, and strain every nerve ot 
live in accordance with the best thing in us; for even if it be small in bulk, 


- 171 - 



much more does it in power and worth surpass everything" (1177^). 

It seems, from these passages, that individuality— what distinguishes one man from another— is 
connected with the body and the irrational soul, while the rational soul or mind is divine and 
impersonal. One man likes oysters, and another likes pineapples; this distinguishes between them. 
But when they think about the multiplication table, provided they think correctly, there is no 
difference between them. The irrational separates us, the rational unites us. Thus the immortality 
of mind or reason is not a personal immortality of separate men, but a share in personal 
immortality, in the sense in which it was taught by Plato and afterwards by Christianity. He 
believed only that, in so far as men are rational, they partake of the divine, which is immortal. It is 
open to man to increase the element of the divine in his nature, and to do so is the highest virtue. 
But if he succeeded completely, he would have ceased to exist as a separate person. This is 
perhaps not the only possible interpretation of Aristotle's words, but I think it is the most natural. 

CHAPTER XX Aristotle's Ethics 

IN the corpus of Aristotle's works, three treatises on ethics have a place, but tow of these are now 
generally held to be by disciples, the third, the Nicomachean Ethics, remains for the most part 
unquestioned as to authenticity, but even in this book there is a portion (Books V, VI, and VII) 
which is held by many to have been incorporated from one of the works of disciples. I shall, 
however, ignore this controversial question, and treat the book as a whole and as Aristotle's. 

The views of Aristotle on ethics represent, in the main, the prevailing opinions of educated and 
experienced men of his day. They are not, like Plato's, impregnated with mystical religion; nor do 
they 


- 172 - 



countenance such unorthodox theories as are to be found in the Republic concerning property and 
the family. Those who neither fall below nor rise above the level of decent, well-behaved citizens 
will find in the Ethics a systematic account of the principles by which they hold that their conduct 
shold be regulated. Those who demand anything more will be disappointed. The book appeals to 
the respectable middle-aged, and has been used by them, especially since the seveteenth century, 
to repress the ardours and enthusiasms of the young. But to a man with any depth of feeling it 
cannot but be repulsive. 

The good, we are told, is happiness, which is an activity of the soul. Aristotle says that Plato was 
right in dividing the soul into tow parts, one rational, the other irrational. The irrational part itself 
he divides into the vegetative (which is found even in plants) and the appetitive (which is found in 
all animals), the appetitive part may be in some degree rational, when the goods that it seeks are 
such as reason approves of. This is essential to the account of virtue, for reason alone, in Aristotle, 
is purely contemplative, and does not, without the help of appetite, lead to any practical activity. 

There are tow kinds of virtues, intellectual and moral, corresponding to the two parts of the soul. 
Intellectual virtues result from teaching, moral virtues from habit. It is the business of the 
legislator to make the citizens good by forming good habits. We become just by performing just 
acts, and similarly as regards other virtues. By being compelled to acquire good habits, we shall in 
time, Aristotle thinks, come to find pleasure in perfonning good actions. One is reminded of 
Hamlet's speech to his mother: 

Assume a virtue if you have it not. That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat, Of habits devil, 
is angel, yet in this, That to the use of actions fair and good He likewise gives a frock or livery 
That aptly is put on. 

We now come to the famous doctrine of the golden mean. Every virtue is a mean between two 
extremes, each of which is a vice. This is proved by an examination of the various virtues. 
Courage is a mean between cowardice and rashness; liberality, between prodigality and 


- 173 - 



meanness; proper pride, between vanity and humility; ready wit, between buffoonery and 
boorishness; modesty, between bashfulness and shamelessness. Some virtues do not seem to fit 
into this scheme; for instance, truthfulness. Aristotle says that this is a mean between boastfulness 
and mock-modesty (1108a), but this only applies to truthfulness about oneself. I do not see how 
truthfulness in any wider sense can be fitted into the scheme. There was once a mayor who had 
adopted Aristotle's doctrine; at the end of his term of office he made a speech saying that he had 
endeavoured to steer the narrow line between partiality on the one hand and impartiality on the 
other. The view of truthfulness as a mean seems scarcely less absurd. 

Aristotle's opinions on moral questions are always such as were conventional in his day. One 
some points they differ from those of our time, chiefly where some form of aristocracy comes in. 
We think that human beings, at least in ethical theory, all have equal rights, and that justice 
involves equality; Aristotle thinks that justice involves, not equality, but right proportion, which is 

only sometimes equality (1131^). 

The justice of a master or a father is different thing from that of a citizen, for a son or slave is 

property, a and there can be no injustice to one's own property (1134^). As regards slaves, 
however, there is slight modification of this doctrine in connection with the question whether it is 
possible for a man to be a friend of his slave: "There is nothing in common between the tow 
parties; the slave is a living tool.... Qua slave, then, one cannot be friends with him. But qua man 
one can; for there seems to be some justice between any man and any other who can share in a 
system of law or be a party to an agreement; therefore can also be friendship with him in so far as 

he is a man" (1161^). 

A father can repudiate his son if he is wicked, but a son cannot repudiate his father, because he 

owes him more than he can possibly repay, especially existence (1163^). In unequal relations, it is 
right, since everybody should be loved in proportion to his worth, that the inferior should love the 
superior more than the superior love the inferior: wives, children, subjects, should have more love 
for husbands, parents, and monarchs than the latter have for them. In a good marriage, "the man 
rules in accordance with his worth, and in those matters in which a man should rule, but the 
matters that 


- 174 - 



befit a woman he hands over to her" (1 160^). He should not rule in her province; still less 
should she rule in his, as sometimes happens when she is an heiress. 

The best individual, as conceived by Aristotle, is avery different person from the Christian 
saint. He should have proper pride, and not underestimate his own merits. He should despise 

whoever deserves to de despised (1124^). The description of the proud or magnanimous man * 
is very interesting as showing the difference between pagan and Christian ethics, and the sense 
in which Nietzsche was justified in regarding Christianity as a slave-morality. 

The magnanimous man, sicne he deserves most, must be good in the highest degree; for the 
better man always deserves more, and the best man most. Therefore the truly magnanimous 
man must be good, and greatness in every virtue would seem to be characteristic of the 
magnanimous man. And it would be most unbecoming for the magnanimous man to fly from 
danger, swinging his arms by his sides, or to wrong another; for to what end should he do 
disgraceful acts, he to whom nothing is great? ... magnanimity, then, seems to be a sort of 
crown of the virtues; for it makes them greater, and it is not found without them. Therefore it is 
hard to be truly magnanimous; for it is impossible without nobility and goodness of character. It 
is chiefly with honours and dishonours, then, that the magnanimous man is concerned; and at 
honours that are great and conferred by good men he will be moderately pleased, thinking that 
he is coming by his own or even less than hi own; for there can be no honour that is worthy of 
perfect virtue, yet he will at any rate accept it since they have nothing greater to bestow on him; 
but honour from casual people and on trifling grounds he will utterly depise, since it is not this 
that he deserves, and dishonour too, since in his case it cannot be just.... Power and wealth are 
desirable for the sake of honour; and to him for whom even honour is a little thing the others 
must be so too. Hence magnanimous men are thought to be disdainful. ...The magnanimous 
man does not run into trifling dangers, ...but he will face great dangers, and when he is in 
danger he 


* The Greek word means, leterally, "great-souled," and is usually translated "magnanimous," 
but the Oxford translation renders it "proud." Neither word, in its modern usage, quite 
expresses Aristotle's meaning but I prefer "magnanimous," and have therefore substituted 
it for "proud" in the above quotation from the Oxford translation. 


- 175 - 


is unsparing of his life, knowing that there are conditions on which life is not worth having. And 
he is the sort of man to confer benefits, but he is ashamed of receiving them; for the one is the 
mark of a superior, the other of an inferior. And he is apt to confer greater benefits in return; for 
thus the original benefactor besides being repaid will incur a debt to him.... It is the mark ot the 
magnanimous man to ask for nothing or scarcely anything, but to give help readily, and to be 
dignified towards people who enjoy a high position but unassuming towards those of the middle 
class; for it is a difficult and lofty thing to be superior to the fonner, but easy to be so to the latter, 
and a lofty bearing ove the former is no mark of ill-breeding, but among humble people it is as 
vulgar as a display of strength against the weak.... He must also be open in his hate and in his love, 
for to conceal one's feelings, i.e. to care less for truth than for what people think, is a coward's 
part.... He is free of speech because he is contemptuous, and he is given to telling the truth, except 
when he speaks in irony to the vulgar. ...Nor is he given to admiration, for to him nothing is 
great.... Nor is he a gossip; for he will speak neither about himself nor about another, since he 
cares not to be praised nor for others to be blamed. ...He is one who will possess beautiful and 
profitless things rather than profitable and useful ones.... Further, a slow step is thought proper to 
the magnanimous man, a deep voice, and a level utterance.... Such, then, is the magnanimous man; 
the man who fall short of him is unduly humble, and the man who goes beyond him is vanin" 

( 1 123 ^- 5 °). 

One shudders to think what a vain man would be like. 

Whatever may be thought of the magnanimous man, one thing is clear: there cannot be very many 
of him in a community. I do not mean merely in the general sense in which there are not likely to 
be many virtuous men, on the ground that virtue is difficult; what I mean is that the virtues of the 
magnanimous man largely depend upon his having an exceptional social position. Aristotle 
considers ethics a branch of politics, and it is not surprising, after his praise of pride, to find that 
he considers monarchy the best fonn of government, and aristocracy the next best. Monarchs and 
aristocrats can be "magnanimous," but ordinary citizens would be laughable if they attempted to 
live up to such a pattern. 

This brings up a question which is half ethical, half political. Can 


- 176 - 



we regard as morally satisfactory a community which, by its essential constitution, confines the 
best things to a few, and requires the majority to be content with the second-best? Plato and 
Aristotle say yes, and Nietzsche agrees with them. Stoics, Christians, and democrats say no. But 
there are great differences in their ways of saying no. Stoics and early Christians consider that the 
greatest good is virtue, and that external circumstances cannot prevent a man from being virtuous; 
there is therefore no need to seek a just social system, since social injustice affects only 
unimportant matters. The democrat, on the contrary, usually holds that, at least so far as politics 
are concerned, the most important goods are power and property; he cannot, therefore, acquiesce 
in a social system which is unjust in these respects. 

The Stoic-Christian view requires a conception of virtue very different from Aristotle's, since it 
must hold that virtue is as possible for the slave as for his master. Christian ethics disapproves of 
pride, which Aristotle thinks a virtue, and praises humility, which he thinks a vice. The 
intellectual virtues, which Plato and Aristotle value above all others, have to be thrust out of the 
list altogether, in order that the poor and humble may be able to be as virtuous as any one else. 
Pope Gregory the Great solemnly reproved a bishop for teaching grammar. 

The Aristotelian view, that the highest virtue is for the few, is logivally connected with the 
subordination of ethics to politics. If the aim is the good community rather than the good 
individual, it is possible that the good community may be one in which there is subordination. In 
an orchestra, the first violin is more important than the oboe, though both are necessary for the 
excellence of the whole. It is impossible to organize an orchestra on the principle of giving to each 
man what would be best for him as an isolated individual. The same sort of thing applies to the 
government of a large modern State, however democratic. A modern democracy - unlike those of 
antiquity - confers great power upon certain chosen individuals, Presidents or Prime Ministers, 
and must expect of them kinds of merit which are not expected of the ordinary citizen. When 
people are not thinking in terms of religion or political controversy, they are likely to hold that a 
good president is more to be honoured than a good bricklayer. In a democracy, a President is not 
expected to be quite 


- 177 - 



like Aristotle's magnanimous man, but still he is expected to be rather different from the 
average citizen, and to have certain merits connnected with his station. These peculiar merits 
would perhaps not be considered "ethical," but that is because we use this adjective in a 
narrower sense than that in which it is used by Aristotle. 

As a result of Christian dogma, the distinction between moral and other merits has become 
much sharper than it was in Greek times. It is a merit in a man to be a great poet or composer or 
painter, but not a moral merit; we do not consider him the more virtuous for possessing such 
aptitudes, or the more likely to go to heaven. Moral merit is concerned solely with acts of will, 
i.e. with choosing rightly among possible courses of action. M am not to blame for not 
composing an opera, because i don't know how to do it. The orthodox view is that, wherever 
two courses of action are possible, conscience tells me which is right, and to choose the other is 
sin. Virtue consists mainly in the avoidance of sin, rather than in anything positive. There is no 
reason to expect an educated man to be morally better than an uneducated man, or a clever man 
than a stupid man. In this way, a number of merits of great social importance are shut out from 
the realm of ethics. The adjective "unethical," in modem usage, has a much narrower range than 
the adjective "undesirable." It is undesirable to be feeble-minded, but not unethical. 

Many modern philosophers, however, have not accepted this view of ethics. They have thought 
that one should first define the good, and then say that our actions ought top be such as tend to 
realize the good. This point of view is more like that of Aristotle, who holds that happiness is 
the good. The highest happiness, it is true, is only open to the philosopher, but to him that is no 
objection to the theory. 

Ethical theories may be divided into two classes, accroding as they regard virtue as an end or a 
means. Aristotle, on the whole, takes the view that virtues are means to an end, namely 
happiness. "The end, then, being what we wish for, the means what we deliberate about and 
choose, actions concerning means most be according to choice and voluntary. Now the exercise 

of the virtues is concerned with means" (11 13^). But there is another sense of virtue in which it 
is included in the ends of action: Human good is activityof soul 


It is true that Aristotle also says this (1 105 a ), but as he means it the consequences are not 
so far-reaching as in the Christian interpretation. 


- 178 - 


in accordance with virtue in a complete life" (1098°). I think he would say that the intellectual 
virtues are ends, but the practical virtues are only means. Christian moralists hold that, while the 
consequences of virtuous actions are in general good, they are not as good as the virtuos actions 
themselves, which are to be valued on their own accountm, and not on account of their effects. On 
the other hand, those who consider pleasure the good regard virtues solely means. Any other 
definition of the good, except the definition as virtue, will have the same consequence. On this 
question, Aristole as already said, agrees mainly, though not wholly, and those who thinkthe first 
business of ethics is to define the good, and that virtue is to be defined as a section tending to 
producethe good. 

The relation of ethics to politics raises another critical question of considerable inportance. 
Granted that the good at which right action should aim is the good of the whole community, or 
ultimately, of the whole human race, is this social good a sum of goods enjoyed by individuals, or 
is it something belonging essentially to the whole, not to the parts? We may illustrate the problem 
by the analogy of the human body. Pleasures are largely associated with different parts of the 
body, but we consider them as belonging to a person as a whole; we may enjoy a pleasant smell, 
but we know that the nose alone could not enjoy it. Some contend that, in a closely organized 
community, there are, analogously, excellences belonging to the whole, but not to any part. If they 
are metaphysicians, they may hold, like Hegel, that whatever quality is good is an attribute of the 
universe as a whole; but they will generally add that it is less mistaken to attribute good to a State 
than to an individual. Logically, the view may not be put as follows. Wh can attribute to a state 
various predicates that cannot be attributed to its separate members - that it is populousm, 
extensive, powerful, etc. The view we are considering puts ethical predicates in this class, and 
says that they only derivatively belong to individuals. A man who may belong tp a populous State, 
or to a good State; but he, they say, is no more good than he is populous. This view, which has 
been widely held by Gennan philosophers, is not Aristotles's, except possibly, in some degree, in 
his conception of justice. 

A considerable part of the Ethics is occupied with the discussion of friendship, including all 
relations that involve affection. Perfect 


- 179 - 



friendship is only possible between the good, and it is impossible to be friends with many people. 
One should not be friends with a person of higher station than one's own, unless he is also of 
higher virtue, which will justify the respect shown to him. We have seen that, in unequal relations, 
such as those of man and wife or father or son, the superior should be the more loved. It is 
impossible to be friends with God, because He cannot love us. Aristotle discusses whether a man 
can be a friend to himself, and decides that this is only possible if he is a good man; wicked men, 

he asserts, often hate themselves. The good man should love himself, but nobly (1169°). Friends 
are a comfort in misfortune, but one should not make them unhappy by seeking their sympathy, as 

is done by women and womanish men (117 1^*). It is not only in misfortune that friends are 
desirable, for the happy man needs friends with whom to share his happiness. "No one would 
choose the whole world on condition of being alone, since man is a political creature and one 

whose nature is to live with others" (1169^). All that is said about friendship is sensible, but there 
is not a word that rises above common sense. 

Aristotle again shows his good sense in the discussion of pleasure, which Plato had regarded 
somewhat ascetically. Pleasure, as Aristotle uses the word, is distinct from happiness, though 
there can be no happiness without pleasure. There are, he says, three views of pleasure: (1) that it 
is never good; (2) that some pleasure is good, but most is bad; (3) that pleasure is good, but not 
the best. He rejects the first of these on the ground that pain is certainly bad, and therefore 
pleasure must be good. He says, very justly, that it is nonsense to say a man can be happy on the 
rack: some degree of external good fortune is necessary for happiness. He also disposes of the 
view that all pleasures are bodily; all things have something divine, and therefore some capacity 
for higher pleasures. Good men have pleasure unless they are unfortunate, and God always enjoys 
a single and simple pleasure. (1152-4). 

There is another discussion of pleasure, in a later part of the book, which is not wholly consistent 
with the above. Here it is argued that there are bad pleasures, which, however, are not pleasures to 

good people (1173^); that perhaps differ in kind (lb); and that pleasures are good or bad 

according as they are connected with good or bad activities (1175^). There are things that are 
valued more 


- 180 - 



than pleasure; no one would be content to go through life with a child's intellect, even if it were 
pleasant to do so. Each animal has its proper pleasure, and the proper pleasure of man is 
connected with reason. 

This leads on to the only doctrine in the book which is not mere common sense. Happiness lies in 
virtuous activity, and perfect happiness lies in the best activity, which is contemplative. 
Contemplation is preferable to war or politics or any other practical career, because it allows 
leisure, and leisure is essential to happiness. Practical virtue brings only a secondary kind of 
happiness; the supreme happiness is in the exercise of reason, for reason, more than anything else, 
is man. Man cannot be wholly contemplative, but in so far as he is so he shares in the divine life. 
"The activity of God, which surpasses all others in blessedness, must be contemplative." Of all 
human beings, the philosopher is the most godlike in his activity, and therefore the happiest and 
best: 

He who exercises his reason and cultivates it seems to be both in the best state of mind and most 
dear to the gods. For if the gods have any care for human affairs, as they are thought to have, it 
would be reasonable both that they should delight in that which was best and most akin to them 
(i.e. reason) and that they should reward those who love and honour this most, as caring for the 
things that are dear to them and acting both rightly and nobly. And that all these attributes belong 
most of all to the philosopher is manifest. He, therefore, is the dearest to the gods. And he who is 
that will presumably be also the happiest; so that in this way too the philosopher will more than 

any other be happy ( 1 179 a ). 

This passage is virtually the peroration of the Ethics', the few paragraphs that follow are concerned 
with the transition to politics. Let us now try to decide what we are to think of the merits and 
demerits of the Ethics. Unlike many other subjects treated by Greek philosophers, ethics has not 
made any definite advances, in the sense of ascertained discoveries; nothing in ethics is known in 
a scientific sense. There is therefore no reason why an ancient treatise on it should be in any 
respect inferior to a modern one. When Aristotle talks about astronomy, we can say definitely that 
he is wrong; but when he talks about ethics we cannot say, in the same sense, either that he is 
wrong or that he is right. Broadly speaking, there are three 


- 181 - 



questions that we can ask about the ethics of Aristotle, or of any other philosopher: (1) Is it 
internally self-consistent? (2) Is it consistent with the remainder of the author's views? (3) Does it 
give answers to ethical problems that are consonant to our own ethical feelings? If the answer to 
either the first or second question is in the negative, the philosopher in question has been guilty of 
some intellectual error. But if the answer to the third question is in the negative, we have no right 
to say that he is mistaken; we have only the right to say that we do not like him. 

Let us examine these three questions in turn, as regards the ethical theory set forth in the 
Nicomachean Ethics. 

(1) On the whole, the book is self-consistent, except in a few not very important respects. The 
doctrine that the good is happiness, and that happiness consists in successful activity, is well 
worked out. The doctrine that every virtue is a mean between two extremes, though very 
ingeniously developed, is less successful, since it does not apply to intellectual contemplation, 
which, we are told, is the best of all activities. It can, however, be maintained that the doctrine of 
the mean is only intended to apply to the practical virtues, not to those of the intellect. Perhaps, to 
take another point, the position of the legislator is somewhat ambiguous. He is to cause children 
and young people to acquire the habit of perfonning good actions, which will, in the end, lead 
them to find pleasure in virtue, and to act virtuously without the need of legal compulsion. It is 
obvious that the legislator might equally well cause the young to acquire bad habits; if this is to be 
avoided, he must have all the wisdom of a Platonic guardian; and if it is not avoided, the argument 
that a virtuous life is pleasant will fail. This problem, however, belongs perhaps more to politics 
than to ethics. 

(2) Aristotle's ethics is, at all points, consistent with his metaphysics. Indeed, his metaphysical 
theories are themselves the expression of an ethical optimism. He believes in the scientific 
importance of final causes, and this implies the belief that purpose governs the course of 
development in the universe. He thinks that changes are, in the main, such as embody an increase 
of organization or "form," and at bottom virtuous actions are those that favour this tendency. It is 
true that a great deal of his practical ethics is not particularly philosophical, but merely the result 
of observation of human affairs; 


- 182 - 



but this part of his doctrine, though it may be independent of his metaphysics, is not inconsistent 
with it. 

(3) When we come to compare Aristotle's ethical tastes with our own, we find, in the first place, 
as already noted, an acceptance of inequality which is repugnant to much modem sentiment. Not 
only is there no objection to slavery, or to the superiority of husbands and fathers over wives and 
children, but it is held that what is best is essentially only for the few— proud men and 
philosophers. Most men, it would seem to follow, are mainly means for the production of a few 
rulers and sages. Kant maintained that every human being is an end in himself, and this may be 
taken as an expression of the view introduced by Christianity. There is, however, a logical 
difficulty in Kant's view, since it gives no means of reaching a decision when two men's interests 
clash. If each is an end in himself, how are we to arrive at a principle for determining which shall 
give way? Such a principle must have to do with the community rather than with the individual. In 
the broadest sense of the word, it will have to be a principle of "justice." Bentham and the 
utilitarians interpret "justice" as "equality": when two men's interests clash, the right course is that 
which produces the greatest total of happiness, regardless of which of the two enjoys it, or how it 
is shared among them. If more is given to the better man than to the worse, that is because, in the 
long run, the general happiness is increased by rewarding virtue and punishing vice, not because 
of an ultimate ethical doctrine that the good deserve more than the bad. "Justice," in this view, 
consists in considering only the amount of happiness involved, without favour to one individual or 
class as against another. Greek philosophers, including Plato and Aristotle, had a different 
conception of justice, and it is one which is still widely prevalent. They thought-originally on 
grounds derived from religion— that each thing or person had its or his proper sphere, to overstep 
which is "unjust." Some men, in virtue of their character and aptitudes, have a wider sphere than 
others, and there is no injustice if they enjoy a greater share of happiness. This view is taken for 
granted in Aristotle, but its basis in primitive religion, which is evident in the earliest 
philosophers, is no longer apparent in his writings. 

There is in Aristotle an almost complete absence of what may be called benevolence or 
philanthropy. The sufferings of mankind, in so 


- 183 - 



far as he is aware of them, do not move him emotionally; he holds them, intellectually, to be an 
evil, but there is no evidence that they cause him unhappiness except when the sufferers happen to 
be his friends. 

More generally, there is an emotional poverty in the Ethics, which is not found in the earlier 
philosophers. There is something unduly smug and comfortable about Aristotle's speculations on 
human affairs; everything that makes men feel a passionate interest in each other seems to be 
forgotten. Even his account of friendship is tepid. He shows no sign of having had any of those 
experiences which make it difficult to preserve sanity; all the more profound aspects of the moral 
life are apparently unknown to him. He leaves out, one may say, the whole sphere of human 
experience with which religion is concerned. What he has to say is what will be useful to 
comfortable men of weak passions ; but he has nothing to say to those who are possessed by a god 
or a devil, or whom outward misfortune drives to despair. For these reasons, in my judgement, his 
Ethics, in spite of its fame, is lacking in intrinsic importance. 

CHAPTER XXI Aristotle's Politics 

ARISTOTLE'S Politics is both interesting and important-teresting, as showing the common 
prejudices of educated Greeks in his time, and important as a source of many principles which 
remained influential until the end of the Middle Ages. I do not think there is much in it that could 
be of any practical use to a statesman of the present day, but there is a great deal that throws light 
on the conflicts of parties in different parts of the Hellenic world. There is not very much 
awareness of methods of government in non-Hellenic States. There are, it is true, allusions to 
Egypt, Babylon, Persia, and Carthage, but except in the case of Carthage they are somewhat 
perfunctory. There is no mention of Alexander, and 

- 184 - 



not even the faintest awareness of the complete transformation that he was effecting in the world. 
The whole discussion is concerned with City States, and there is no prevision of their 
obsolescence. Greece, owing to its division into independent cities, was a laboratory of political 
experiment; but nothing to which these experiments were relevant existed from Aristotle's time 
until the rise of the Italian cities in the Middle Ages. In many ways, the experience to which 
Aristotle appeals is more relevant to the comparatively modern world than to any that existed for 
fifteen hundred years after the book was written. 

There are many pleasant incidental remarks, some of which may be noted before we embark upon 
political theory. We are told that Euripides, when he was staying at the court of Arche laus, King 
of Macedon, was accused of halitosis by a certain Decamnichus. To soothe his fury, the king gave 
him permission to scourge Decamnichus, which he did. Decamnichus, after waiting many years, 
joined in a successful plot to kill the king; but by this time Euripides was dead. We are told that 
children should be conceived in winter, when the wind is in the north; that there must be a careful 
avoidance of indecency, because "shameful words lead to shameful acts," and that obscenity is 
never to be tolerated except in temples, where the law pennits even ribaldry. People should not 
marry too young, because, if they do, the children will be weak and female, the wives will become 
wanton, and the husbands stunted in their growth. The right age for marriage is thirty-seven in 
men, eighteen in women. 

We leam how Thales, being taunted with his poverty, bought up all the olive-presses on the 
instalment plan, and was then able to charge monopoly rates for their use. This he did to show that 
philosophers can make money, and, if they remain poor, it is because they have something more 
important than wealth to think about. All this, however, is by the way; it is time to come to more 
serious matters. 

The book begins by pointing out the importance of the State; it is the highest kind of community, 
and aims at the highest good. In order of time, the family comes first; it is built on the two 
fundamental relations of man and woman, master and slave, both of which are natural. Several 
families combined make a village; several villages, a State, provided the combination is nearly 
large enough to be self- 


- 185 - 



sufficing. The State, though later in time than the family, is prior to it, and even to the individual, 
by nature; for "what each thing is when fully developed we call its nature," and human society, 
fully developed, is a State, and the whole is prior to the part. The conception involved here is that 
of organism: a hand, when the body is destroyed, is, we are told, no longer a hand. The 
implication is that a hand is to be defined by its purpose— that of grasping— which it can only 
perform when joined to a living body. In like manner, an individual cannot fulfil his purpose 
unless he is part of a State. He who founded the State, Aristotle says, was the greatest of 
benefactors; for without law man is the worst of animals, and law depends, for its existence, on 
the State. The State is not a mere society for exchange and the prevention of crime: "The end of 
the State is the good life. . . . And the State is the union of families and villages in a perfect and 

self-sufficing life, by which we mean a happy and honourable life" ( 1280^). "A political society 
exists for the sake of noble actions, not of mere companionship" ( 1 2 8 1 a ) . 

A State being composed of households, each of which consists of one family, the discussion of 
politics should begin with the family. The bulk of this discussion is concerned with slavery— for in 
antiquity the slaves were always reckoned as part of the family. Slavery is expedient and right, but 
the slave should be naturally inferior to the master. From birth, some are marked out for 
subjection, others for rule; the man who is by nature not his own but another man's is by nature a 

slave. Slaves should not be Greeks, but of an inferior race with less spirit ( 1255 a , and 1330a) 
Tame animals are better off when ruled by man, and so are those who are naturally inferior when 
ruled by their superiors. It may be questioned whether the practice of making slaves out of 
prisoners of war is justified; power, such as leads to victory in war, seems to imply superior virtue, 
but this is not always the case. War, however, is just when waged against men who, though 

intended by nature to be governed, will not submit ( 1256^); and in this case, it is implied, it 
would be right to make slaves of the conquered. This would seem enough to justify any conqueror 
who ever lived; for no nation will admit that it is intended by nature to be governed, and the only 
evidence as to nature's intentions must be derived from the outcome of war. In every war, 
therefore, the victors are in the right and the vanquished in the wrong. Very satisfactory! 


- 186 - 



Next comes a discussion of trade, which profoundly influenced scholastic casuistry. There are two 
uses of a thing, one proper, the other improper; a shoe, for instance, may be worn, which is its 
proper use, or exchanged, which is its improper use. It follows that there is something degraded 
about a shoemaker, who must exchange his shoes in order to live. Retail trade, we are told, is not 

a natural part of the art of getting wealth ( 1257 a ). The natural way to get wealth is by skilful 
management of house and land. To the wealth that can be made in this way there is a limit, but to 
what can be made by trade there is none. Trade has to do with money, but wealth is not the 
acquisition of coin. Wealth derived from trade is justly hated, because it is unnatural. "The most 
hated sort, and with the greatest reason, is usury, which makes a gain out of money itself, and not 
from the natural object of it. For money was intended to be used in exchange, but not to increase 
at interest. ... Of all modes of getting wealth this is the most unnatural" ( 1258). 

What came of this dictum you may read in Tawney's Religion and the Rise of Capitalism. But 
while his history is reliable, his comment has a bias in favour of what is pre-capitalistic. 

"Usury" means all lending money at interest, not only, as now, lending at an exorbitant rate. From 
Greek times to the present day, mankind, or at least the economically more developed portion of 
them, have been divided into debtors and creditors; debtors have disapproved of interest, and 
creditors have approved of it. At most times, landowners have been debtors, while men engaged 
in commerce have been creditors. The views of philosophers, with few exceptions, have coincided 
with the pecuniary interests of their class. Greek philosophers belonged to, or were employed by, 
the landowning class; they therefore disapproved of interest. Mediaeval philosophers were 
churchmen, and the property of the Church was mainly in land; they therefore saw no reason to 
revise Aristotle’s opinion. Their objection to usury was reinforced by anti-Semitism, for most fluid 
capital was Jewish. Ecclesiastics and barons had their quarrels, sometimes very bitter; but they 
could combine against the wicked Jew who had tided them over a bad harvest by means of a loan, 
and considered that he deserved some reward for his thrift. 

With the Reformation, the situation changed. Many of the most earnest Protestants were business 
men, to whom lending money at 


- 187 - 



interest was essential. Consequently first Calvin, and then other Protestant divines, sanctioned 
interest. At last the Catholic Church was compelled to follow suit, because the old prohibitions 
did not suit the modern world. Philosophers, whose incomes are derived from the investments of 
universities, have favoured interest ever since they ceased to be ecclesiastics and therefore 
connected with landowning. At every stage, there has been a wealth of theoretical argument to 
support the economically convenient opinion. 

Plato's Utopia is criticized by Aristotle on various grounds. There is first the very interesting 
comment that it gives too much unity to the State, and would make it into an individual. Next 
comes the kind of argument against the proposed abolition of the family that naturally occurs to 
every reader. Plato thinks that, by merely giving the title of "son" to all who are of an age that 
makes their sonship possible, a man will acquire towards the whole multitude the sentiments that 
men have at present towards their actual sons, and correlatively as regards the title "father." 
Aristotle, on the contrary, says that what is common to the greatest number receives the least care, 
and that if "sons" are common to many "fathers" they will be neglected in common; it is better to 
be a cousin in reality than a "son" in Plato's sense; Plato's plan would make love watery. Then 
there is a curious argument that, since abstinence from adultery is a virtue, it would be a pity to 

have a social system which abolishes this virtue and the correlative vice ( 1263^). Then we are 
asked: if women are common, who will manage the house? I wrote an essay once, called 
"Architecture and the Social System," in which I pointed out that all who combine communism 
with abolition of the family also advocate communal houses for large numbers, with communal 
kitchens, dining-rooms, and nurseries. This system may be described as monasteries without 
celibacy. It is essential to the carrying out of Plato's plans, but it is certainly not more impossible 
than many other things that he recommends. 

Plato's communism annoys Aristotle. It would lead, he says, to anger against lazy people, and to 
the sort of quarrels that are common between fellow-travellers. It is better if each minds his own 
business. Property should be private, but people should be so trained in benevolence as to allow 
the use of it to be largely common. Benevolence and generosity are virtues, and without private 
property 


- 188 - 



they are impossible. Finally we are told that, if Plato's plans were good, someone would have 
thought of them sooner. f_I do not agree with Plato, but if anything could make me do so, it 
would be Aristotle's arguments against him. 

As we have seen in connection with slavery, Aristotle is no believer in equality. Granted, 
however, the subjection of slaves and women, it still remains a question whether all citizens 
should be politically equal. Some men, he says, think this desirable, on the ground that all 
revolutions turn on the regulation of property. He rejects this argument, maintaining that the 
greatest crimes are due to excess rather than want; no man becomes a tyrant in order to avoid 
feeling the cold. 

A government is good when it aims at the good of the whole community, bad when it cares only 
for itself. There are three kinds of government that are good: monarchy, aristocracy, and 
constitutional government (or polity); there are three that are bad: tyranny, oligarchy, and 
democracy. There are also many mixed intermediate forms. It will be observed that the good 
and bad governments are defined by the ethical qualities of the holders of power, not by the 
form of the constitution. This, however, is only partly true. An aristocracy is a rule of men of 
virtue, an oligarchy is a rule of the rich, and Aristotle does not consider virtue and wealth 
strictly synonymous. What he holds, in accordance with the doctrine of the golden mean, is that 
a moderate competence is most likely to be associated with virtue: "Mankind do not acquire or 
preserve virtue by the help of external goods, but external goods by the help of virtue, and 
happiness, whether consisting in pleasure or virtue, or both, is more often found with those who 
are most highly cultivated in their mind and in their character, and have only a moderate share 
of external goods, than among those who possess external goods to a useless extent but are 

deficient in higher qualities" ( 1323 a and ^). There is therefore a difference between the rule of 
the best (aristocracy) and of the richest (oligarchy), since the best are likely to have only 
moderate fortunes. There is also a difference between democracy 


* Cf. The Noodle's Oration in Sydney Smith: "If the proposal be sound, would the Saxon 
have passed it by? Would the Dine have ignored it? Would it have escaped the wisdom of 
the Norman?" (I quote from memory.) 


- 189 - 


and polity, in addition to the ethical difference in the government, for what Aristotle calls "polity" 

retains some oligarchic elements ( 1293^). But between monarchy and tyranny the only difference 
is ethical. 

He is emphatic in distinguishing oligarchy and democracy by the economic status of the governing 
party: there is oligarchy when the rich govern without consideration for the poor, democracy when 
power is in the hands of the needy and they disregard the interest of the rich. 

Monarchy is better than aristocracy, aristocracy is better than polity. But the corruption of the best 
is worst; therefore tyranny is worse than oligarchy, and oligarchy than democracy. In this way 
Aristotle arrives at a qualified defence of democracy; for most actual governments are bad, and 
therefore, among actual governments, democracies tend to be best. 

The Greek conception of democracy was in many ways more extreme than ours; for instance, 
Aristotle says that to elect magistrates is oligarchic, while it is democratic to appoint them by lot. 
In extreme democracies, the assembly of the citizens was above the law, and decided each 
question independently. The Athenian lawcourts were composed of a large number of citizens 
chosen by lot, unaided by any jurist; they were, of course, liable to be swayed by eloquence or 
party passion. When democracy is criticized, it must be understood that this sort of thing is meant. 

There is a long discussion of causes of revolution. In Greece, revolutions were as frequent as 
formerly in Latin America, and therefore Aristotle had a copious experience from which to draw 
inferences. The main cause was the conflict of oligarchs and democrats. Democracy, Aristotle 
says, arises from the belief that men who are equally free should be equal in all respects; 
oligarchy, from the fact that men who are superior in some respect claim too much. Both have a 
kind of justice, but not the best kind. "Therefore both parties, whenever their share in the 

government does not accord with their preconceived ideas, stir up revolution" ( 1 3 0 1 a ) . 
Democratic governments are less liable to revolutions than oligarchies, because oligarchs may fall 
out with each other. The oligarchs seem to have been vigorous fellows. In some cities, we are told, 
they swore an oath: "I will 


- 190 - 



be an enemy to the people, and will devise all the hann against them which I can." Now-a-days, 
reactionaries are not so frank. 

The three things needed to prevent revolution are government propaganda in education, respect 
for law, even in small things, and justice in law and administration, i.e., "equality according to 

proportion, and for every man to enjoy his own" (1307 a , 1307^, 13 10 3 ). Aristotle never seems to 
have realized the difficulty of "equality according to proportion." If this is to be true justice, the 
proportion must be of virtue. Now virtue is difficult to measure, and is a matter of party 
controversy. In political practice, therefore, virtue tends to be measured by income; the distinction 
between aristocracy and oligarchy, which Aristotle attempts to make, is only possible where there 
is a very well-established hereditary nobility. Even then, as soon as there exists a large class of 
rich men who are not noble, they have to be admitted to power for fear of their making a 
revolution. Hereditary aristocracies cannot long retain their power except where land is almost the 
only source of wealth. All social inequality, in the long run, is inequality of income. That is part of 
the argument for democracy; that the attempt to have a "proportionate justice" based on any merit 
other than wealth is sure to break down. Defenders of oligarchy pretend that income is 
proportional to virtue; the Psalmist said he had never seen a righteous man begging his bread, and 
Aristotle thinks that good men acquire just about his own income, neither very large nor very 
small. But such views are absurd. Every kind of "justice" other than absolute equality will, in 
practice, reward some quality quite other than virtue, and is therefore to be condemned. 

There is an interesting section on tyranny. A tyrant desires riches, whereas a king desires honour. 
The tyrant has guards who are mercenaries, whereas the king has guards who are citizens. Tyrants 
are mostly demagogues, who acquire power by promising to protect the people against the 
notables. In an ironically Machiavellian tone, Aristotle explains what a tyrant must do to retain 
power. He must prevent the rise of any person of exceptional merit, by execution or assassination 
if necessary. He must prohibit common meals, clubs, and any education likely to produce hostile 
sentiment. There must be no literary assemblies or discussions. He must prevent people from 
knowing each other well, and compel them to live in public at his gates. He should employ spies, 
like the female detectives at Syracuse. 


- 191 - 



He must sow quarrels, and impoverish his subjects. He should keep them occupied in great works, 
as the king of Egypt did in getting the pyramids built. He should give power to women and slaves, 
to make them infonners. He should make war, in order that his subjects may have something to do 

and be always in want of a leader (13 13 a and ^). 

It is a melancholy reflection that this passage is, of the whole book, the one most appropriate to 
the present day. Aristotle concludes that there is no wickedness too great for a tyrant. There is, 
however, he says, another method of preserving a tyranny, namely by moderation and by seeming 
religious. There is no decision as to which method is likely to prove the more successful. 

There is a long argument to prove that foreign conquest is not the end of the State, showing that 
many people took the imperialist view. There is, it is true, an exception: conquest of "natural 
slaves" is right and just. This would, in Aristotle's view, justify wars against barbarians, but not 
against Greeks, for no Greeks are "natural slaves." In general, war is only a means, not an end; a 
city in an isolated situation, where conquest is not possible, may be happy; States that live in 
isolation need not be inactive. God and the universe are active, though foreign conquest is 
impossible for them. The happiness that a State should seek, therefore, though war may 
sometimes be a necessary means to it, should not be war, but the activities of peace. 

This leads to the question: how large should a State be? Large cities, we are told, are never well 
governed, because a great multitude cannot be orderly. A State ought to be large enough to be 
more or less self-sufficing, but not too large for constitutional government. It ought to be small 
enough for the citizens to know each other’s characters, otherwise right will not be done in 
elections and lawsuits. The territory should be small enough to be surveyed in its entirety from a 

hill-top. We are told both that it should be selfsufficient (1326^) and that it should have an export 
and import trade (1327 a ), which seems an inconsistency. 

Men who work for their living should not be admitted to citizenship. "Citizens should not lead the 
life of mechanics or tradesmen, for such a life is ignoble and inimical to virtue." Nor should they 
be husbandmen, because they need leisure. The citizens should own the property, but the 
husbandmen should be slaves of a different race 


- 192 - 



(1330 a ). Northern races, we are told, are spirited; southern races, intelligent; therefore slaves 
should be of southern races, since it is inconvenient if they are spirited. The Greeks alone are 
both spirited and intelligent; they are better governed than barbarians, and if united could rule 

the world (1327^). One might have expected at this point some allusion to Alexander, but there 
is none. 

With regard to the size of States, Aristotle makes, on a different scale, the same mistake that is 
made by many modern liberals. A State must be able to defend itself in war, and even, if any 
liberal culture is to survive, to defend itself without very great difficulty. How large this 
requires a State to be, depends upon the technique of war and industry. In Aristotle's day, the 
City State was obsolete because it could not defend itself against Macedonia. In our day, Greece 
as a whole, including Macedonia, is obsolete in this sense, as has been recently proved. ^_To 
advocate complete independence for Greece, or any other small country, is now as futile as to 
advocate complete independence for a single city, whose territory can be seen entire from an 
eminence. There can be no true independence except for a State or alliance strong enough, by 
its own efforts, to repel all attempts at foreign conquest. Nothing smaller than America and the 
British Empire combined will satisfy this requirement; and perhaps even this would be too 
small a unit. 

The book, which, in the form in which we have it, appears to be unfinished, ends with a 
discussion of education. Education, of course, is only for children who are going to be citizens; 
slaves may be taught useful arts, such as cooking, but these are no part of education. The citizen 
should be moulded to the form of government under which he lives, and there should therefore 
be differences according as the city in question is oligarchic or democratic. In the discussion, 
however, Aristotle assumes that the citizens will all have a share of political power. Children 
should learn what is useful to them, but not vulgarizing; for instance, they should not be taught 
any skill that deforms the body, or that would enable them to earn money. They should practice 
athletics in moderation, but not to the point of acquiring professional skill; the boys who train 
for the Olympic games suffer in health, as is shown by the fact that those who have been 


* This was written in May, 1941. 


- 193 - 


victors as boys are hardly ever victors as men. Children should learn drawing, in order to 
appreciate the beauty of the human form; and they should be taught to appreciate such painting 
and sculpture as expresses moral ideas. They may leam to sing and to play musical instruments 
enough to be able to enjoy music critically, but not enough to be skilled performers; for no 
freeman would play or sing unless drunk. They must of course learn to read and write, in spite of 
the usefulness of these arts. But the purpose of education is virtue," not usefulness. What Aristotle 
means by "virtue" he has told us in the Ethics, to which this book frequently refers. 

Aristotle's fundamental assumptions, in his Politics, are very different from those of any modern 
writer. The aim of the State, in his view, is to produce cultured gentlemen-men who combine the 
aristocratic mentality with love of learning and the arts. This combination existed, in its highest 
perfection, in the Athens of Pericles, not in the population at large, but among the well-to-do. It 
began to break down in the last years of Pericles. The populace, who had no culture, turned 
against the friends of Pericles, who were driven to defend the privileges of the rich, by treachery, 
assassination, illegal despotism, and other such not very gentlemanly methods. After the death of 
Socrates, the bigotry of the Athenian democracy diminished, and Athens remained the centre of 
ancient culture, but political power went elsewhere. Throughout later antiquity, power and culture 
were usually separate: power was in the hands of rough soldiers, culture belonged to powerless 
Greeks, often slaves. This is only partially true of Rome in its great days, but it is emphatically 
true before Cicero and after Marcus Aurelius. After the barbarian invasion, the "gentlemen" were 
northern barbarians, the men of culture subtle southern ecclesiastics. This state of affairs 
continued, more or less, until the Renaissance, when the laity began to acquire culture. From the 
Renaissance onwards, the Greek conception of government by cultured gentlemen gradually 
prevailed more and more, reaching its acme in the eighteenth century. 

Various forces have put an end to this state of affairs. First, democracy, as embodied in the French 
Revolution and its aftennath. The cultured gentlemen, as after the age of Pericles, had to defend 
their privileges against the populace, and in the process ceased to be either gentlemen or cultured. 
A second cause was the rise of indus- 


- 194 - 



trialism, with a scientific technique very different from traditional culture. A third cause was 
popular education, which conferred the power to read and write, but did not confer culture; this 
enabled a new type of demagogue to practise a new type of propaganda, as seen in the 
dictatorships. 

Both for good and evil, therefore, the day of the cultured gentleman is past. 

CHAPTER XXII Aristotle's Logic 

ARISTOTLE'S influence, which was very great in many different fields, was greatest of all in 
logic. In late antiquity, when Plato was still supreme in metaphysics, Aristotle was the recognized 
authority in logic, and he retained this position throughout the Middle Ages. It was not till the 
thirteenth century that Christian philosophers accorded him supremacy in the field of metaphysics 
This supremacy was largely lost after the Renaissance, but his supremacy in logic survived. Even 
at the present day, all Catholic teachers of philosophy and many others still obstinately reject the 
discoveries of modern logic, and adhere with a strange tenacity to a system which is as definitely 
antiquated as Ptolemaic astronomy. This makes it difficult to do historical justice to Aristotle. His 
present-day influence is so inimical to clear thinking that it is hard to remember how great an 
advance he made upon all his predecessors (including Plato), or how admirable his logical work 
would still seem if it had been a stage in a continual progress, instead of being (as in fact it was) a 
dead end, followed by over two thousand years of stagnation. In dealing with the predecessors of 
Aristotle, it is not necessary to remind the reader that they are not verbally inspired; one can 
therefore praise them for their ability without being supposed to subscribe to all their doctrines. 
Aristotle, on the contrary, is still, especially in logic, a battle-ground, and cannot be treated in a 
purely historical spirit. 


- 195 - 



Aristotle's most important work in logic is the doctrine of the syllogism. A syllogism is an 
argument consisting of three parts, a major premiss, a minor premiss, and a conclusion. 

Syllogisms are of a number of different kinds, each of which has a name, given by the scholastics. 
The most familiar is the kind called " Barbara 

All men are mortal (Major premiss). Socrates is a man (Minor premiss). Therefore: Socrates is 
mortal (Conclusion). Or: All men are mortal. All Greeks are men. Therefore: All Greeks are 
mortal. 

( Aristotle does not distinguish between these two forms; this, as we shall see later, is a mistake.) 

Other forms are: No fishes are rational, all sharks are fishes, therefore no sharks are rational. (This 
is called "Celarent . ") 

All men are rational, some animals are men, therefore some animals are rational. (This is called 
"Darii. ") 

No Greeks are black, some men are Greeks, therefore some men are not black. (This is called 
"Ferio. ") 

These four make up the "first figure"; Aristotle adds a second and third figure, and the schoolmen 
added a fourth. It is shown that the three later figures can be reduced to the first by various 
devices. 

There are some inferences that can be made from a single premiss. From "some men are mortal" 
we can infer that "some mortals are men." According to Aristotle, this can also be inferred from 
"all men are mortal." From "no gods are mortal" we can infer "no mortals are gods," but from 
"some men are not Greeke" it does not follow that "some Greeks are not men." 

Apart from such inferences as the above, Aristotle and his followers thought that all deductive 
inference, when strictly stated, is syllogistic. By setting forth all the valid kinds of syllogism, and 
setting out any suggested argument in syllogistic form, it should therefore be possible to avoid all 
fallacies. 

This system was the beginning of fonnal logic, and, as such, was both important and admirable. 
But considered as the end, not the beginning, of fonnal logic, it is open to three kinds of criticism: 


- 196 - 



(1) Formal defects within the system itself. 

(2) Over-estimation of the syllogism, as compared to other fonns of deductive argument. 

(3) Over-estimation of deduction as a fonn of argument. 

On each of these three, something must be said. 

(1) Formal defects . Let us begin with the two statements "Socrates is a man" and "all Greeks are 
men." It is necessary to make a sharp distinction between these two, which is not done in 
Aristotelian logic. The statement "all Greeks are men" is commonly interpreted as implying that 
there are Greeks; without this implication, some of Aristotle’s syllogisms are not valid. Take for 
instance: 

"All Greeks are men, all Greeks are white, therefore some men are white." This is valid if there 
are Greeks, but not otherwise. If I were to say: 

"All golden mountains are mountains, all golden mountains are golden, therefore some mountains 
are golden," my conclusion would be false, though in some sense my premisses would be true. If 
we are to be explicit, we must therefore divide the one statement "all Greeks are men" into two, 
one saying "there are Greeks," and the other saying "if anything is a Greek, it is a man." The latter 
statement is purely hypothetical, and does not imply that there are Greeks. 

The statement "all Greeks are men" is thus much more complex in form than the statement 
"Socrates is a man." "Socrates is a man" has "Socrates" for its subject, but "all Greeks are men" 
does not have "all Greeks" for its subject, for there is nothing about "all Greeks" either in the 
statement "there are Greeks" or in the statement "if anything is a Greek it is a man." 

This purely formal error was a source of errors in metaphysics and theory of knowledge. Consider 
the state of our knowledge in regard to the two propositions "Socrates is mortal" and "all men are 
mortal." In order to know the truth of "Socrates is mortal," most of us are content to rely upon 
testimony; but if testimony is to be reliable, it must lead us back to some one who knew Socrates 
and saw him dead. The one perceived fact— the dead body of Socrates— together with the 
knowledge that this was called "Socrates," was enough to assure us of the mortality of Socrates. 
But when it comes to "all men are mortal," the matter is different. The question of our knowledge 
of such general propositions is a very difficult one. Sometimes 


- 197 - 



they are merely verbal: "all Greeks are men" is known because nothing is called "a Greek" unless 
it is a man. Such general statements can be ascertained from the dictionary; they tell us nothing 
about the world except how words are used. But "all men are mortal" is not of this sort; there is 
nothing logically self-contradictory about an immortal man. We believe the proposition on the 
basis of induction, because there is no well-authenticated case of a man living more than (say) 150 
years; but this only makes the proposition probable, not certain. It cannot be certain so long as 
living men exist. 

Metaphysical errors arose through supposing that "all men" is the subject of "all men are mortal" 
in the same sense as that in which "Socrates" is the subject of "Socrates is mortal." It made it 
possible to hold that, in some sense, "all men" denotes an entity of the same sort as that denoted 
by "Socrates." This led Aristotle to say that in a sense a species is a substance. He is careful to 
qualify this statement, but his followers, especially Porphyry, showed less caution. 

Another error into which Aristotle falls through this mistake is to think that a predicate of a 
predicate can be a predicate of the original subject. If I say " Socrates is Greek, all Greeks are 
human," Aristotle thi nk s that "human" is a predicate of "Greek," while "Greek" is a predicate of 
"Socrates," and obviously "human" is a predicate of "Socrates." But in fact "human" is not a 
predicate of "Greek." The distinction between names and predicates, or, in metaphysical language, 
between particulars and universals, is thus blurred, with disastrous consequences to philosophy. 
One of the resulting confusions was to suppose that a class with only one member is identical with 
that one member. This made it impossible to have a correct theory of the number one, and led to 
endless bad metaphysics about unity. 

(2) Over-estimation of the syllogism . The syllogism is only one kind of deductive argument. In 
mathematics, which is wholly deductive, syllogisms hardly ever occur. Of course it would be 
possible to re-write mathematical arguments in syllogistic fonn, but this would be very artificial 
and would not make them any more cogent. Take arithmetic, for example. If I buy goods worth 
$4.63, and tender a $5 bill in payment, how much change is due to me? To put this simple sum in 
the form of a syllogism would be absurd, and would tend to conceal the real nature of the 
argument. Again, within logic there are non-syllogistic inferences, such as: "A horse is an animal, 
there- 


- 198 - 



fore a horse's head is an animal’s head." Valid syllogisms, in fact, are only some among valid 
deductions, and have no logical priority over others. The attempt to give pre-eminence to the 
syllogism in deduction misled philosophers as to the nature of mathematical reasoning. Kant, who 
perceived that mathematics is not syllogistic, inferred that it uses extra-logical principles, which, 
however, he supposed to be as certain as those of logic. He, like his predecessors, though in a 
different way, was misled by respect for Aristotle. 

(3) Over-estimation of deduction . The Greeks in general attached more importance to deduction 
as a source of knowledge than modern philosophers do. In this respect, Aristotle was less at fault 
than Plato; he repeatedly admitted the importance of induction, and he devoted considerable 
attention to the question: how do we know the first premisses from which deduction must start? 
Nevertheless, he, like other Greeks, gave undue prominence to deduction in his theory of 
knowledge. We shall agree that Mr. Smith (say) is mortal, and we may, loosely, say that we know 
this because we know that all men are mortal. But what we really know is not "all men are 
mortal"; we know rather something like "all men born more than one hundred and fifty years ago 
are mortal, and so are almost all men bom more than one hundred years ago." This is our reason 
for thinking that Mr. Smith will die. But this argument is an induction, not a deduction. It has less 
cogency than a deduction, and yields only a probability, not a certainty; but on the other hand it 
gives new knowledge, which deduction does not. All the important inferences outside logic and 
pure mathematics are inductive, not deductive; the only exceptions are law and theology, each of 
which derives its first principles from an unquestionable text, viz. the statute books or the 
scriptures. 

Apart from The Prior Analytics, which deals with the syllogism, there are other writings of 
Aristotle which have considerable importance in the history of philosophy. One of these is the 
short work on The Categories. Porphyry the Neoplatonist wrote a commentary on this book, 
which had a very notable influence on medieval philosophy; but for the present let us ignore 
Porphyry and confine ourselves to Aristotle. 

What, exactly, is meant by the word "category," whether in Aristotle or in Kant and Hegel, I must 
confess that I have never been able 


- 199 - 



to understand. I do not myself believe that the tenn "category" is in any way useful in philosophy, 
as representing any clear idea. There are, in Aristotle, ten categories: substance, quantity, quality, 
relation, place, time, position, state, action, and affection. The only definition offered of the term 
"category" is: "expressions which are in no way composite signify"~and then follows the above 
list. This seems to mean that every word of which the meaning is not compounded of the 
meanings of other words signifies a substance or a quantity or etc. There is no suggestion of any 
principle on which the list of ten categories has been compiled. 

"Substance" is primarily what is not predicable of a subject nor present in a subject. A thing is 
said to be ’present in a subject" when, though not a part of the subject, it cannot exist without the 
subject. The instances given are a piece of grammatical knowledge which is present in a mind, and 
a certain whiteness which may be present in a body. A substance in the above primary sense is an 
individual thing or person or animal. But in a secondary sense a species or a genus-e.g., "man" or 
"animal"-may be called a substance. This secondary sense seems indefensible, and opened the 
door, in later writers, to much bad metaphysics. 

The Posterior Analytics is a work largely concerned with a question which must trouble any 
deductive theory, namely: How are first premisses obtained? Since deduction must start from 
somewhere, we must begin with something unproved, which must be known otherwise than by 
demonstration. I shall not give Aristotle's theory in detail, since it depends upon the notion of 
essence. A definition, he says, is a statement of a thing's essential nature. The notion of essence is 
an intimate part of every philosophy subsequent to Aristotle, until we come to modem times. It is, 
in my opinion, a hopelessly muddle-headed notion, but its historical importance requires us to say 
something about it. 

The "essence" of a thing appears to have meant "those of its properties which it cannot change 
without losing its identity." Socrates may be sometimes happy, sometimes sad; sometimes well, 
sometimes ill. Since he can change these properties without ceasing to be Socrates, they are no 
part of his essence. But it is supposed to be of the essence of Socrates that he is a man, though a 
Pythagorean, who believes in transmigration, will not admit this. In fact, the question of 


- 200 - 



"essence" is one as to the use of words. We apply the same name, on different occasions, to 
somewhat different occurrences, which we regard as manifestations of a single "thing" or 
"person." In fact, however, this is only a verbal convenience. The "essence" of Socrates thus 
consists of those properties in the absence of which we should not use the name "Socrates." The 
question is purely linguistic: a word may have an essence, but a thing cannot. 

The conception of "substance," like that of "essence," is a transference to metaphysics of what is 
only a linguistic convenience. We find it convenient, in describing the world, to describe a certain 
number of occurrences as events in the life of "Socrates," and a certain number of others as events 
in the life of "Mr. Smith." This leads us to think of "Socrates" or "Mr. Smith" as denoting 
something that persists through a certain number of years, and as in some way more "solid" and 
"real" than the events that happen to him. If Socrates is ill, we think that Socrates, at other times, 
is well, and therefore the being of Socrates is independent of his illness; illness, on the other hand, 
requires somebody to be ill. But although Socrates need not be ill, something must be occurring to 
him if he is to be considered to exist. He is not, therefore, really any more "solid" than the things 
that happen to him. 

"Substance," when taken seriously, is a concept impossible to free from difficulties. A substance 
is supposed to be the subject of properties, and to be something distinct from all its properties. But 
when we take away the properties, and try to imagine the substance by itself, we find that there is 
nothing left. To put the matter in another way: What distinguishes one substance from another? 
Not difference of properties, for, according to the logic of substance, difference of properties 
presupposes numerical diversity between the substances concerned. Two substances, therefore, 
must be just two, without being, in themselves, in any way distinguishable. How, then, are we 
ever to find out that they are two? 

"Substance," in fact, is merely a convenient way of collecting events into bundles. What can we 
know about Mr. Smith? When we look at him, we see a pattern of colours; when we listen to him 
talking, we hear a series of sounds. We believe that, like us, he has thoughts and feelings. But 
what is Mr. Smith apart from all these occurrences? A mere imaginary hook, from which the 
occurrences 


- 201 - 



are supposed to hang. They have in fact no need of a hook, any more than the earth needs an 
elephant to rest upon. Any one can see, in the analogous case of a geographical region, that such a 
word as " France" (say) is only a linguistic convenience, and that there is not a thing called 
"France" over and above its various parts. The same holds of "Mr. Smith"; it is a collective name 
for a number of occurrences. If we take it as anything more, it denotes something completely 
unknowable, and therefore not needed for the expression of what we know. 

"Substance," in a word, is a metaphysical mistake, due to transference to the world-structure of the 
structure of sentences composed of a subject and a predicate. 

I conclude that the Aristotelian doctrines with which we have been concerned in this chapter are 
wholly false, with the exception of the formal theory of the syllogism, which is unimportant. Any 
person in the present day who wishes to learn logic will be wasting his time if he reads Aristotle 
or any of his disciples. None the less, Aristotle's logical writings show great ability, and would 
have been useful to mankind if they had appeared at a time when intellectual originality was still 
active. Unfortunately, they appeared at the very end of the creative period of Greek thought, and 
therefore came to be accepted as authoritative. By the time that logical orginality revived, a reign 
of two thousand years had made Aristotle very difficult to dethrone. Throughout modem times, 
practically every advance in science, in logic, or in philosophy has had to be made in the teeth of 
the opposition from Aristotle's disciples. 


- 202 - 

CHAPTER XXIII Aristotle's Physics 

IN this chapter I propose to consider two of Aristotle's books, the one called Physics and the one 
called On the Heavens. These two books are closely connected; the second takes up the argument 
at the point at which the first has left it. Both were extremely influential, and dominated science 
until the time of Galileo. Words such as "quintessence" and "sublunary" are derived from the 
theories expressed in these books. The historian of philosophy, accordingly, must study them, in 
spite of the fact that hardly a sentence in either can be accepted in the light of modem science. 

To understand the views of Aristotle, as of most Greeks, on physics, it is necessary to apprehend 
their imaginative background. Every philosopher, in addition to the formal system which he offers 
to the world, has another, much simpler, of which he may be quite unaware. If he is aware of it, he 
probably realizes that it won't quite do; he therefore conceals it, and sets forth something more 
sophisticated, which he believes because it is like his crude system, but which he asks others to 
accept because he thi nk s he has made it such as cannot be disproved. The sophistication comes in 
by way of refutation of refutations, but this alone will never give a positive result: it shows, at 
best, that a theory may be tme, not that it must be. The positive result, however little the 
philosopher may realize it, is due to his imaginative preconceptions, or to what Santayana calls 
"animal faith." 

In relation to physics, Aristotle's imaginative background was very different from that of a modem 
student. Now-a-days, a boy begins with mechanics, which, by its very name, suggests machines. 
He is accustomed to motor-cars and aeroplanes; he does not, even in the dimmest recesses of his 
subconscious imagination, think that a motorcar contains some sort of horse in its inside, or that 
an aeroplane flies 


- 203 - 



because its wings are those of a bird possessing magical powers. Animals have lost their 
importance in our imaginative pictures of the world, in which man stands comparatively alone as 
master of a mainly lifeless and largely subservient material environment. 

To the Greek, attempting to give a scientific account of motion, the purely mechanical view hardly 
suggested itself, except in the case of a few men of genius such as Democritus and Archimedes. 
Two sets of phenomena seemed important: the movements of animals, and the movements of the 
heavenly bodies. To the modern man of science, the body of an animal is a very elaborate 
machine, with an enormously complex physico-chemical structure; every new discovery consists 
in diminishing the apparent gulf between animals and machines. To the Greek, it seemed more 
natural to assimilate apparently lifeless motions to those of animals. A child still distinguishes live 
animals from other things by the fact that they can move of themselves; to many Greeks, and 
especially to Aristotle, this peculiarity suggested itself as the basis of a general theory of physics. 

But how about the heavenly bodies? They differ from animals by the regularity of their 
movements, but this may be only due to their superior perfection. Every Greek philosopher, 
whatever he may have come to think in adult life, had been taught in childhood to regard the sun 
and moon as gods; Anaxagoras was prosecuted for impiety because he thought that they were not 
alive. It was natural that a philosopher who could no longer regard the heavenly bodies themselves 
as divine should think of them as moved by the will of a Divine Being who had a Hellenic love of 
order and geometrical simplicity. Thus the ultimate source of all movement is Will: on earth the 
capricious Will of human beings and animals, but in heaven the unchanging Will of the Supreme 
Artificer. 

I do not suggest that this applies to every detail of what Aristotle has to say. What I do suggest is 
that it gives his imaginative background, and represents the sort of thing which, in embarking on 
his investigations, he would expect to find true. 

After these preliminaries, let us examine what it is that he actually says. 

Physics, in Aristotle, is the science of what the Greeks called "phusis" (or "physis"), a word which 
is translated "nature," but has not exactly the meaning which we attach to that word. We still 
speak 


- 204 - 



of "natural science" and "natural history," but "nature" by itself, though it is a very ambiguous 
word, seldom means just what "phusis" meant. "Phusis" had to do with growth; one might say it is 
the "nature" of an acom to grow into an oak, and in that case one would be using the word in the 
Aristotelian sense. The "nature" of a thing, Aristotle says, is its end, that for the sake of which it 
exists. Thus the word has a teleological implication. Some things exist by nature, some from other 
causes. Animals, plants, and simple bodies (elements) exist by nature; they have an internal 
principle of motion. (The word translated "motion" or "movement" has a wider meaning than 
"locomotion"; in addition to locomotion it includes change of quality or of size.) Nature is a 
source of being moved or at rest. Things "have a nature" if they have an internal principle of this 
kind. The phrase "according to nature" applies to these things and their essential attributes. (It was 
through this point of view that "unnatural" came to express blame.) Nature is in form rather than 
in matter; what is potentially flesh or bone has not yet acquired its own nature, and a thing is more 
what it is when it has attained to fulfilment. This whole point of view seems to be suggested by 
biology: the acom is "potentially" an oak. 

Nature belongs to the class of causes which operate for the sake of something. This leads to a 
discussion of the view that nature works of necessity, without purpose, in connection with which 
Aristotle discusses the survival of the fittest, in the fonn taught by Empedocles. This cannot be 
right, he says, because things happen in fixed ways, and when a series has a completion, all 
preceding steps are for its sake. Those things are "natural" which "by a continuous movement 

originated from an internal principle, arrive at some completion" (199^). 

This whole conception of "nature," though it might well seem admirably suited to explain the 
growth of animals and plants, became, in the event, a great obstacle to the progress of science, and 
a source of much that was bad in ethics. In the latter respect, it is still harmful. 

Motion, we are told, is the fulfilling of what exists potentially. This view, apart from other defects, 
is incompatible with the relativity of locomotion. When A moves relatively to B, B moves 
relatively to A, and there is no sense in saying that one of the two is in motion while the other is at 
rest. When a dog seizes a bone, it seems to common 


- 205 - 



sense that the dog moves while the bone remains at rest (until seized), and that the motion has a 
purpose, namely to fulfil the dog's "nature." But it has turned out that this point of view cannot be 
applied to dead matter, and that, for the purposes of scientific physics, no conception of an "end" 
is useful, nor can any motion, in scientific strictness, be treated as other than relative. 

Aristotle rejects the void, as maintained by Leucippus and Democritus. He then passes on to a 
rather curious discussion of time. It might, he says, be maintained that time does not exist, since it 
is composed of past and future, of which one no longer exists while the other does not yet exist. 
This view, however, he rejects. Time, he says, is motion that admits of numeration. (It is not clear 
why he thinks numeration essential.) We may fairly ask, he continues, whether time could exist 
without the soul, since there cannot be anything to count unless there is some one to count, and 
time involves numeration. It seems that he thinks of time as so many hours or days or years. Some 
things, he adds, are eternal, in the sense of not being in time; presumably he is thinking of such 
things as numbers. 

There always has been motion, and there always will be; for there cannot be time without motion, 
and all are agreed that time is uncreated, except Plato. On this point, Christian followers of 
Aristotle were obliged to dissent from him, since the Bible tells us that the universe had a 
beginning. 

The Physics ends with the argument for an unmoved mover, which we considered in connection 
with the Metaphysics. There is one unmoved mover, which directly causes a circular motion. 
Circular motion is the primary kind, and the only kind which can be continuous and infinite. The 
first mover has no parts or magnitude and is at the circumference of the world. 

Having reached this conclusion, we pass on to the heavens. 

The treatise On the Heavens sets forth a pleasant and simple theory. Things below the moon are 
subject to generation and decay; from the moon upwards, everything is ungenerated and 
indestructible. The earth, which is spherical, is at the centre of the universe. In the sublunary 
sphere, everything is composed of the four elements, earth, water, air, and fire; but there is a fifth 
element, of which the heavenly bodies are composed. The natural movement of the terrestrial 
elements is rectilinear, but that of the fifth element is circular. The 


- 206 - 



heavens are perfectly spherical, and the upper regions are more divine than the lower. The stars 
and planets are not composed of fire, but of the fifth element; their motion is due to that of spheres 
to which they are attached. (All this appears in poetical form in Dante Paradiso.) 

The four terrestrial elements are not eternal, but are generated out of each other— fire is absolutely 
light, in the sense that its natural motion is upward; earth is absolutely heavy. Air is relatively 
light, and water is relatively heavy. 

This theory provided many difficulties for later ages. Comets, which were recognized as 
destructible, had to be assigned to the sublunary sphere, but in the seventeenth century it was 
found that they describe orbits round the sun, and are very seldom as near as the moon. Since the 
natural motion of terrestrial bodies is rectilinear, it was held that a projectile fired horizontally will 
move horizontally for a time, and then suddenly begin to fall vertically. Galileo's discovery that a 
projectile moves in a parabola shocked his Aristotelian colleagues. Copernicus, Kepler, and 
Galileo had to combat Aristotle as well as the Bible in establishing the view that the earth is not 
the centre of the universe, but rotates once a day and goes round the sun once a year. 

To come to a more general matter: Aristotelian physics is incompatible with Newton "First Law 
of Motion, " originally enunciated by Galileo. This law states that every body, left to itself, will, if 
already in motion, continue to move in a straight line with uniform velocity. Thus outside causes 
are required, not to account for motion, but to account for change of motion, either in velocity or 
in direction. Circular motion, which Aristotle thought "natural" for the heavenly bodies, involves a 
continual change in the direction of motion, and therefore requires a force directed towards the 
centre of the circle, as in Newton's law of gravitation. 

Finally: The view that the heavenly bodies are eternal and incorruptible has had to be abandoned. 
The sun and stars have long lives, but do not live for ever. They are born from a nebula, and in the 
end they either explode or die of cold. Nothing in the visible world is exempt from change and 
decay; the Aristotelian belief to the contrary, though accepted by medieval Christians, is a product 
of the pagan worship of sun and moon and planets. 


- 207 - 



CHAPTER XXIV Early Greek Mathematics and Astronomy 


I AM concerned in this chapter with mathematics, not on its own account, but as it was related to 
Greek philosophy~a relation which, especially in Plato, was very close. The preeminence of the 
Greeks appears more clearly in mathematics and astronomy than in anything else. What they did 
in art, in literature, and in philosophy, may be judged better or worse according to taste, but what 
they accomplished in geometry is wholly beyond question. They derived something from Egypt, 
and rather less from Babylonia; but what they obtained from these sources was, in mathematics, 
mainly rules of thumb, and in astronomy records of observations extended over very long periods. 
The art of mathematical demonstration was, almost wholly, Greek in origin. 

There are many pleasant stories, probably unhistorical, showing what practical problems 
stimulated mathematical investigations. The earliest and simplest relates to Thales, who, when in 
Egypt, was asked by the king to find out the height of a pyramid. He waited for the time of day 
when his shadow was as long as he was tall; he then measured the shadow of the pyramid, which 
was of course equal to its height. It is said that the laws of perspective were first studied by the 
geometer Agatharcus, in order to paint scenery for the plays of Aeschylus. The problem of finding 
the distance of a ship at sea, which was said to have been studied by Thales, was correctly solved 
at an early stage. One of the great problems that occupied Greek geometers, that of the duplication 
of the cube, originated, we are told, with the priests of a certain temple, who were informed by the 
oracle that the god wanted a statue twice as large as the one they had. At first 

- 208 - 



they 
thought 
simply of 
doubling 
all the 
dimensions 
of the 
statue, but 
then they 
realized 
that the 
result 
would be 
eight times 
as large as 
the 

original, 

which 

would 

involve 

more 

expense 

than the 

god had 

demanded. 

So they 

sent a 

deputation 

to Plato to 

ask 

whether 
anybody in 
the 

Academy 
could solve 
their 
problem. 
The 

geometers 
took it up, 
and worked 
at it for 
centuries, 
producing, 
incidentall 
y, much 
admirable 
work. The 
problem is, 
of course, 
that of 
detenninin 
g the cube 



* G 


e 

k 

M 

a 

t 

h 


ti 

c 

s, 

V 

ol 

I, 

P- 

1 

4 

5 . 

- 209 - 



graceful, and implies that he himself began to know about it rather late in life. It had of course an 
important bearing on the Pythagorean philosophy. 


One of the most important consequences of the discovery of irrationals was the invention of the 
geometrical theory of proportion by Eudoxus ( ca . 408 — ca. 355 B.C.). Before him, there was only 
the arithmetical theory of proportion. According to this theory, the ratio of a to b is equal to the 
ratio of c to d if a times d is equal to b times c. This definition, in the absence of an arithmetical 
theory of irrationals, is only applicable to rationals. Eudoxus, however, gave a new definition not 
subject to this restriction, framed in a manner which suggests the methods of modern analysis. 

The theory is developed in Euclid, and has great logical beauty. 

Eudoxus also either invented or perfected the "method of exhaustion," which was subsequently 
used with great success by Archimedes. This method is an anticipation of the integral calculus. 
Take, for example, the question of the area of a circle. You can inscribe in a circle a regular 
hexagon, or a regular dodecagon, or a regular polygon of a thousand or a million sides. The area 
of such a polygon, however many sides it has, is proportional to the square on the diameter of the 
circle. The more sides the polygon has, the more nearly it becomes equal to the circle. You can 
prove that, if you give the polygon enough sides, its area can be got to differ from that of the circle 
by less than any previously assigned area, however small. For this purpose, the "axiom of 
Archimedes" is used. This states (when somewhat simplified) that if the greater of two quantities 
is halved, and then the half is halved, and so on, a quantity will be reached, at last, which is less 
than the smaller of the original two quantities. In other words, if a is greater than b, there is some 

whole number n such that 2 n times b is greater than a. 

The method of exhaustion sometimes leads to an exact result, as in squaring the parabola, which 
was done by Archimedes; sometimes, as in the attempt to square the circle, it can only lead to 
successive approximations. The problem of squaring the circle is the problem of determining the 
ratio of the circumference of a circle to the diameter, which is called I€. Archimedes used the 
approximation 22/7 in calculations; by inscribing and circumscribing a regular polygon of 96 
sides, he proved that I€ is less than 3 1/7 and greater 


- 210 - 



than 3 10/71. The method could be carried to any required degree of approximation, and that is all 
that any method can do in this problem. The use of inscribed and circumscribed polygons for 
approximations to I€ goes back to Antiphon, who was a contemporary of Socrates. 

Euclid, who was still, when I was young, the sole acknowledged text-book of geometry for boys, 
lived at Alexandria, about 300 B.C., a few years after the death of Alexander and Aristotle. Most 
of his Elements was not original, but the order of propositions, and the logical structure, were 
largely his. The more one studies geometry, the more admirable these are seen to be. The 
treatment of parallels by means of the famous postulate of parallels has the twofold merit of rigour 
in deduction and of not concealing the dubiousness of the initial assumption. The theory of 
proportion, which follows Eudoxus, avoids all the difficulties connected with irrationals, by 
methods essentially similar to those introduced by Weierstrass into nineteenthcentury analysis. 
Euclid then passes on to a kind of geometrical algebra, and deals, in BookX, with the subject of 
irrationals. After this he proceeds to solid geometry, ending with the construction of the regular 
solids, which had been perfected by Theaetetus and assumed in Plato's Timaeus. 

Euclid Elements is certainly one of the greatest books ever written, and one of the most perfect 
monuments of the Greek intellect. It has, of course, the typical Greek limitations: the method is 
purely deductive, and there is no way, within it, of testing the initial assumptions. These 
assumptions were supposed to be unquestionable, but in the nineteenth century non-Euclidean 
geometry showed that they might be in part mistaken, and that only observation could decide 
whether they were so. 

There is in Euclid the contempt for practical utility which had been inculcated by Plato. It is said 
that a pupil, after listening to a demonstration, asked what he would gain by learning geometry, 
whereupon Euclid called a slave and said "Give the young man threepence, since he must needs 
make a gain out of what he learns." The contempt for practice was, however, pragmatically 
justified. No one, in Greek times, supposed that conic sections had any utility; at last, in the 
seventeenth century, Galileo discovered that projectiles move in parabolas, and Kepler discovered 
that planets move in ellipses. Sud- 


- 211 - 



denly the work that the Greeks had done from pure love of theory became the key to warfare 
and astronomy. 

The Romans were too practical-minded to appreciate Euclid; the first of them to mention him is 
Cicero, in whose time there was probably no Latin translation; indeed there is no record of any 
Latin translation before Boethius ( ca . A.D. 480). The Arabs were more appreciative: a copy was 
given to the caliph by the Byzantine emperor about A.D. 760, and a translation into Arabic was 
made under Harun al Rashid, about A.D. 800. The first still extant Latin translation was made 
from the Arabic by Athelhard of Bath in A.D. 1 120. From that time on, the study of geometry 
gradually revived in the West; but it was not until the late Renaissance that important advances 
were made. 

I come now to astronomy, where Greek achievements were as remarkable as in geometry. 
Before their time, among the Babylonians and Egyptians, many centuries of observation had 
laid a foundation. The apparent motions of the planets had been recorded, but it was not kn own 
that the morning and evening star were the same. A cycle of eclipses had been discovered, 
certainly in Babylonia and probably in Egypt, which made the prediction of lunar eclipses fairly 
reliable, but not of solar eclipses, since those were not always visible at a given spot. We owe to 
the Babylonians the division of the right angle into ninety degrees, and of the degree into sixty 
minutes; they had a liking for the number sixty, and even a system of numeration based upon it. 
The Greeks were fond of attributing the wisdom of their pioneers to travels in Egypt, but what 
had really been achieved before the Greeks was very little. The prediction of an eclipse by 
Thales was, however, an example of foreign influence; there is no reason to suppose that he 
added anything to what he learnt from Egyptian or Babylonian sources, and it was a stroke of 
luck that his prediction was verified. 

Let us begin with some of the earliest discoveries and correct hypotheses. Anaximander thought 
that the earth floats freely, and is not supported on anything. Aristotle, ^_who often rejected the 
best hypotheses of his time, objected to the theory of Anaximander, that the earth, being at the 
centre, remained immovable because there was 


De Caelo, 295^. 


- 212 - 


no reason for moving in one direction rather than another. If this were valid, he said, a man placed 
at the centre of a circle with food at various points of the circumference would starve to death for 
lack of reason to choose one portion of food rather than another. This argument reappears in 
scholastic philosophy, not in connection with astronomy, but with free will. It reappears in the 
form of "Buridan's ass," which was unable to choose between two bundles of hay placed at equal 
distances to right and left, and therefore died of hunger. 

Pythagoras, in all probability, was the first to think the earth spherical, but his reasons were (one 
must suppose) aesthetic rather than scientific. Scientific reasons, however, were soon found. 
Anaxagoras discovered that the moon shines by reflected light, and gave the right theory of 
eclipses. He himself still thought the earth flat, but the shape of the earth's shadow in lunar 
eclipses gave the Pythagoreans conclusive arguments in favour of its being spherical. They went 
further, and regarded the earth as one of the planets. They knew-from Pythagoras himself, it is 
said— that the morning star and the evening star are identical, and they thought that all the planets, 
including the earth, move in circles, not round the sun, but round the "central fire." They had 
discovered that the moon always turns the same face to the earth, and they thought that the earth 
always turns the same face to the "central fire." The Mediterranean regions were on the side turned 
away from the central fire, which was therefore always invisible. The central fire was called "the 
house of Zeus," or "the Mother of the gods." The sun was supposed to shine by light reflected 
from the central fire. In addition to the earth, there was another body, the counter-earth, at the 
same distance from the central fire. For this, they had two reasons, one scientific, one derived 
from their arithmetical mysticism. The scientific reason was the correct observation that an eclipse 
of the moon sometimes occurs when both sun and moon are above the horizon. Refraction, which 
is the cause of this phenomenon, was unknown to them, and they thought that, in such cases, the 
eclipse must be due to the shadow of a body other than the earth. The other reason was that the 
sun and moon, the five planets, the earth and counter-earth, and the central fire, made ten heavenly 
bodies, and ten was the mystic number of the Pythagoreans. 

This Pythagorean theory is attributed to Philolaus, a Theban, who 


- 213 - 



lived at the end of the fifth century B.C. Although it is fanciful and in part quite unscientific, it 
is very important, since it involves the greater part of the imaginative effort required for 
conceiving the Copemican hypothesis. To conceive of the earth, not as the centre of the 
universe, but as one among the planets, not as eternally fixed, but as wandering through space, 
showed an extraordinary emancipation from anthropocentric thinking. When once this jolt had 
been given to men's natural picture of the universe, it was not so very difficult to be led by 
scientific arguments to a more accurate theory. 

To this various observations contributed. Oenopides, who was slightly later than Anaxagoras, 
discovered the obliquity of the ecliptic. It soon became clear that the sun must be much larger 
than the earth, which fact supported those who denied that the earth is the centre of the 
universe. The central fire and the counter-earth were dropped by the Pythagoreans soon after the 
time of Plato. Heraclides of Pontus (whose dates are about 388 to 315 B.C., contemporary with 
Aristotle) discovered that Venus and Mercury revolve about the sun, and adopted the view that 
the earth rotates on its own axis once every twenty-four hours. This last was a very important 
step, which no predecessor had taken. Heraclides was of Plato's school, and must have been a 
great man, but was not as much respected as one would expect; he is described as a fat dandy. 

Aristarchus of Samos, who lived approximately from 3 10 to 230 B.C., and was thus about 
twenty-five years older than Archimedes, is the most interesting of all ancient astronomers, 
because he advanced the complete Copernican hypothesis, that all the planets, including the 
earth, revolve in circles round the sun, and that the earth rotates on its axis once in twenty-four 
hours. It is a little disappointing to find that the only extant work of Aristarchus, On the Sizes 
and Distances of the Sun and the Moon, adheres to the geocentric view. It is true that, for the 
problems with which this book deals, it makes no difference which theory is adopted, and he 
may therefore have thought it unwise to burden his calculations with an unnecessary opposition 
to the general opinion of astronomers; or he may have only arrived at the Copernican hypothesis 
after writing this book. Sir Thomas Heath, in his work on Aristarchus, jywhich contains the text 
of this book 


* Aristarchus of Samos, the Ancient Copernicus. By Sir Thomas Heath. Oxford 1913. What 
follows is based on this book. 


- 214 - 


with a translation, inclines to the latter view. The evidence that Aristarchus suggested the 
Copernican view is, in any case, quite conclusive. 

The first and best evidence is that of Archimedes, who, as we have seen, was a younger 
contemporary of Aristarchus. Writing to Gelon, King of Syracuse, he says that Aristarchus 
brought out "a book consisting of certain hypotheses," and continues: "His hypotheses are that 
the fixed stars and the sun remain unmoved, that the earth revolves about the sun in the 
circumference of a circle, the sun lying in the middle of the orbit." There is a passage in 
Plutarch saying that Cleanthes "thought it was the duty of the Greeks to indict Aristarchus of 
Samos on the charge of impiety for putting in motion the Hearth of the Universe (i.e. the earth), 
this being the effect of his attempt to save the phenomena by supposing the heaven to remain at 
rest and the earth to revolve in an oblique circle, while it rotates, at the same time, about its own 
axis." Cleanthes was a contemporary of Aristarchus, and died about 232 B.C. In another 
passage, Plutarch says that Aristarchus advanced this view only as a hypothesis, but that his 
successor Seleucus maintained it as a definite opinion. ( Seleucus flourished about 150 B.C.). 
AA«tius and Sextus Empiricus also assert that Aristarchus advanced the heliocentric 
hypothesis, but do not say that it was set forth by him only as a hypothesis. Even if he did so, it 
seems not unlikely that he, like Galileo two thousand years later, was influenced by the fear of 
offending religious prejudices, a fear which the attitude of Cleanthes (mentioned above) shows 
to have been well grounded. 

The Copernican hypothesis, after being advanced, whether positively or tentatively, by 
Aristarchus, was definitely adopted by Seleucus, but by no other ancient astronomer. This 
general rejection was mainly due to Hipparchus, who flourished from 161 to 126 B.C. He is 
described by Heath as "the greatest astronomer of antiquity." f_He was the first to write 
systematically on trigonometry; he discovered the precession of the equinoxes; he estimated the 
length of the lunar month with an error of less than one second; he improved Aristarchus's 
estimates of the sizes and distances of the sun and moon; he made a catalogue of eight hundred 
and fifty fixed stars, giving 


* Greek Mathematics, Vol. II, p. 253. 


- 215 - 

their latitude and longitude. As against the heliocentric hypothesis of Aristarchus, he adopted and 
improved the theory of epicycles which had been invented by Apollonius, who flourished about 
220 B.C.; it was a development of this theory that came to be known, later, as the Ptolemaic 
system, after the astronomer Ptolemy, who flourished in the middle of the second century A.D. 
Copernicus came to know something, though not much, of the almost forgotten hypothesis of 
Aristarchus, and was encouraged by finding ancient authority for his innovation. Otherwise, the 
effect of this hypothesis on subsequent astronomy was practically «/7. Ancient astronomers, in 
estimating the sizes of the earth, moon, and sun, and the distances of the moon and sun, used 
methods which were theoretically valid, but they were hampered by the lack of instruments of 
precision. Many of their results, in view of this lack, were surprisingly good. Eratosthenes 
estimated the earth's diameter at 7850 miles, which is only about fifty miles short of the truth. 
Ptolemy estimated the mean distance of the moon at 29 A 'A times the earth's diameter; the correct 
figure is about 30.7. None of them got anywhere near the size and distance of the sun, which all 
underestimated. Their estimates, in terms of the earth's diameter, were: 

Aristarchus, 180; 

Hipparchus, 1245; 


Posidonius, 6545. 

The correct figure is 1 1,726. It will be seen that these estimates continually improved (that of 
Ptolemy, however, showed a retrogression); that of Posidonius iMs about half the correct figure. 
On the whole, their picture of the solar system was not so very far from the truth. 

Greek astronomy was geometrical, not dynamic. The ancients thought of the motions of the 
heavenly bodies as uniform and circular, or compounded of circular motions. They had not the 
conception of force. There were spheres which moved as a whole, and on which the various 
heavenly bodies were fixed. With Newton and gravitation a new point of view, less geometrical, 
was introduced. It is curious to observe that there is a reversion to the geometrical point 


* Posidonius was Cicero's teacher. He flourished in the latter half of the second century. B.C. 

- 216 - 

of view in Einstein's General Theory of Relativity, from which the conception of force, in the 
Newtonian sense, has been banished. 

The problem for the astronomer is this: given the apparent motions of the heavenly bodies on the 
celestial sphere, to introduce, by hypothesis, a third co-ordinate, depth, in such a way as to make 
the description of the phenomena as simple as possible. The merit of the Copemican hypothesis is 
not truth, but simplicity; in view of the relativity of motion, no question of truth is involved. The 
Greeks, in their search for hypotheses which would "save the phenomena," were in effect, though 
not altogether in intention, tackling the problem in the scientifically correct way. A comparison 
with their predecessors, and with their successors until Copernicus, must convince every student 
of their truly astonishing genius. 

Two very great men, Archimedes and Apollonius, in the third century B.C., complete the list of 
first-class Greek mathematicians. Archimedes was a friend, probably a cousin, of the king of 
Syracuse, and was killed when that city was captured by the Romans in 212 B.C. Apollonius, 
from his youth, lived at Alexandria. Archimedes was not only a mathematician, but also a 
physicist and student of hydrostatics. Apollonius is chiefly noted for his work on conic sections. I 
shall say no more about them, as they came too late to influence philosophy. 

After these two men, though respectable work continued to be done in Alexandria, the great age 
was ended. Under the Roman domination, the Greeks lost the self-confidence that belongs to 
political liberty, and in losing it acquired a paralysing respect for their predecessors. The Roman 
soldier who killed Archimedes was a symbol of the death of original thought that Rome caused 
throughout the Hellenic world. 


- 217 - 


Part III. Ancient Philosophy after Aristotle 
CHAPTER XXV The Hellenistic World 

THE history of the Greek-speaking world in antiquity may be divided into three periods: that of 
the free City States, which was brought to an end by Philip and Alexander; that of the Macedonian 
domination, of which the last remnant was extinguished by the Roman annexation of Egypt after 
the death of Cleopatra; and finally that of the Roman Empire. Of these three periods, the first is 
characterized by freedom and disorder, the second by subjection and disorder, the third by 
subjection and order. 

The second of these periods is known as the Hellenistic age. In science and mathematics, the work 
done during this period is the best ever achieved by the Greeks. In philosophy, it includes the 
foundation of the Epicurean and Stoic schools, and also of scepticism as a definitely formulated 
doctrine; it is therefore still important philosophically, though less so than the period of Plato and 
Aristotle. After the third century B.C., there is nothing really new in Greek philosophy until the 
Neoplatonists in the third century A.D. But meanwhile the Roman world was being prepared for 
the victory of Christianity. 

The brief career of Alexander suddenly transformed the Greek world. In the ten years from 334 to 
324 B.C., he conquered Asia Minor, Syria, Egypt, Babylonia, Persia, Samarcand, Bactria, and the 
Punjab. The Persian Empire, the greatest that the world had known, was destroyed by three 
battles. The ancient lore of the Babylonians, along with their ancient superstitions, became 
familiar to Greek curiosity; so did the Zoroastrian dualism and (in a lesser degree) the religions of 

- 218 - 



India, where Buddhism was moving towards supremacy. Wherever Alexander penetrated, even in 
the mountains of Afghanistan, on the banks of the Jaxartes, and on the tributaries of the Indus, he 
founded Greek cities, in which he tried to reproduce Greek institutions, with a measure of self- 
government. Although his army was composed mainly of Macedonians, and although most 
European Greeks submitted to him unwillingly, he considered himself, at first, as the apostle of 
Hellenism. Gradually, however, as his conquests extended, he adopted the policy of promoting a 
friendly fusion between Greek and barbarian. 

For this he had various motives. On the one hand, it was obvious that his armies, which were not 
very large, could not permanently hold so vast an empire by force, but must, in the long run, 
depend upon conciliation of the conquered populations. On the other hand, the East was 
unaccustomed to any form of government except that of a divine king, a role which Alexander felt 
himself well fitted to perform. Whether he believed himself a god, or only took on the attributes of 
divinity from motives of policy, is a question for the psychologist, since the historical evidence is 
indecisive. In any case, he clearly enjoyed the adulation which he received in Egypt as successor 
of the Pharaohs, and in Persia as the Great King. His Macedonian captains— the "Companions," as 
they were called— had towards him the attitude of western nobles to their constitutional sovereign: 
They refused to prostrate themselves before him, they gave advice and criticism even at the risk of 
their lives, and at a crucial moment they controlled his actions, when they compelled him to turn 
homewards from the Indus instead of marching on to the conquest of the Ganges. Orientals were 
more accommodating, provided their religious prejudices were respected. This offered no 
difficulty to Alexander; it was only necessary to identify Ammon or Bel with Zeus, and to declare 
himself the son of the god. Psychologists observe that Alexander hated Philip, and was probably 
privy to his murder; he would have liked to believe that his mother Olympias, like some lady of 
Greek mythology, had been beloved of a god. Alexander's career was so miraculous that he may 
well have thought a miraculous origin the best explanation of his prodigious success. 

The Greeks had a very strong feeling of superiority to the barbarians; Aristotle no doubt expresses 
the general view when he says 


- 219 - 



that northern races are spirited, southern races civilized, but the Greeks alone are both spirited and 
civilized. Plato and Aristotle thought it wrong to make slaves of Greeks, but not of barbarians. 
Alexander, who was not quite a Greek, tried to break down this attitude of superiority. He himself 
married two barbarian princesses, and he compelled his leading Macedonians to marry Persian 
women of noble birth. His innumerable Greek cities, one would suppose, must have contained 
many more male than female colonists, and their men must therefore have followed his example 
in intermarrying with the women of the locality. The result of this policy was to bring into the 
minds of thoughtful men the conception of mankind as a whole; the old loyalty to the City State 
and (in a lesser degree) to the Greek race seemed no longer adequate. In philosophy, this 
cosmopolitan point of view begins with the Stoics, but in practice it begins earlier, with 
Alexander. It had the result that the interaction of Greek and barbarian was reciprocal: The 
barbarians leamt something of Greek science, while the Greeks learnt much of barbarian 
superstition. Greek civilization, in covering a wider area, became less purely Greek. 

Greek civilization was essentially urban. There were, of course, many Greeks engaged in 
agriculture, but they contributed little to what was distinctive in Hellenic culture. From the 
Milesian school onwards, the Greeks who were eminent in science and philosophy and literature 
were associated with rich commercial cities, often surrounded by barbarian populations. This type 
of civilization was inaugurated, not by the Greeks, but by the Phoenicians; Tyre and Sidon and 
Carthage depended on slaves for manual labour at home, and on hired mercenaries in the conduct 
of their wars. They did not depend, as modern capital cities do, upon large rural populations of the 
same blood and with equal political rights. The nearest modern analogue is to be seen in the Far 
East during the latter half of the nineteenth century. Singapore and Hong Kong, Shanghai and the 
other treaty ports of China, were little European islands, where the white men formed a 
commercial aristocracy living on coolie labour. In North America, north of the Mason-Dixon line, 
since such labour was not available, white men were compelled to practise agriculture. For this 
reason, the hold of the white man on North America is secure, while his hold on the Far East has 
already been greatly diminished, and may easily cease altogether. Much of his type of culture, 
especially 


- 220 - 



industrialism, will, however, survive. This analogue will help us to understand the position of 
the Greeks in the eastern parts of Alexander's empire. 

The effect of Alexander on the imagination of Asia was great and lasting. The first Book of the 
Maccabees, written centuries after his death, opens with an account of his career: 

"And it happened, after that Alexander son of Philip, the Macedonian, who came out of the land 
of Chettiim, had smitten Darius king of the Persians and Medes, that he reigned in his stead, the 
first over Greece, and made many wars, and won many strong holds, and slew the kings of the 
earth, and went through to the ends of the earth, and took spoils of many nations, insomuch that 
the earth was quiet before him; whereupon he was exalted, and his heart was lifted up. And he 
gathered a mighty strong host, and ruled over countries, and nations, and kings, who became 
tributaries unto him. And after these things he fell sick, and perceived that he should die. 
Wherefore he called his servants, such as were honorable, and had been brought up with him 
from his youth, and parted his kingdom among them, while he was yet alive. ^_So Alexander 
reigned twelve years, and then died." 

He survived as a legendary hero in the Mohammedan religion, and to this day petty chieftains in 
the Himalayas claim to be descended from him.a€ No other fully historical hero has ever 
furnished such a perfect opportunity for the mythopoeic faculty. 

At Alexander's death, there was an attempt to preserve the unity of his empire. But of his two 
sons, one was an infant and the other was not yet born. Each had supporters, but in the resultant 
civil war both were thrust aside. In the end, his empire was divided between the families of 
three generals, of whom, roughly speaking, one obtained the European, one the African, and 
one the Asiatic parts of Alexander's possessions. The European part fell ultimately to 
Antigonus's descendants; Ptolemy, who obtained Egypt, made Alexandria his capital; Seleucus, 
who obtained Asia after many wars, was too busy with campaigns to have a fixed capital, but in 
later times Antioch was the chief city of his dynasty. 


* This is not historically true. 

^ Perhaps this is no longer true, as the sons of those who held this belief have been educated 
€ at Eton. 


- 221 - 


Both the Ptolemies and the Seleucids (as the dynasty of Seleucus was called) abandoned 
Alexander’s attempts to produce a fusion of Greek and barbarian, and established military 
tyrannies based, at first, upon their part of the Macedonian army strengthened with Greek 
mercenaries. The Ptolemies held Egypt fairly securely, but in Asia two centuries of confused 
dynastic wars were only ended by the Roman conquest. During these centuries, Persia was 
conquered by the Parthians, and the Bactrian Greeks were increasingly isolated. 

In the second century B.C. (after which they rapidly declined) they had a king, Menander, 
whose Indian Empire was very extensive. A couple of dialogues between him and Buddhist 
sage have survived in Pali, and, in part, in a Chinese translation. Dr. Tarn suggests that the first 
of these is based on a Greek original; the second, which ends with Menander abdicating and 
becoming a Buddhist saint, is certainly not. 

Buddhism, at this time, was a vigorous proselytizing religion. Asoka (264-28), the saintly 
Buddhist king, records, in a still extant inscription, that he sent missionaries to all the 
Macedonian kings: "And this is the chiefest conquest in His Majesty's opinion— the conquest by 
the Law; this also is that effected by His Majesty both in his own dominions and in all the 
neighboring realms as far as six hundred leagues— even to where the Greek king Antiochus 
dwells, and beyond that Antiochus to where dwell the four kings severally named Ptolemy, 
Antigonus, Magas and Alexander . . . and likewise here, in the king's dominions, among the 
Yonas" jy(i.c. the Greeks of the Punjab). Unfortunately no western account of these 
missionaries has survived. 

Babylonia was much more profoundly influenced by Hellenism. As we have seen, the only 
ancient who followed Aristarchus of Samos in maintaining the Copernican system was 
Seleucus of Seleucia on the Tigris, who flourished about 150 B.C. Tacitus tells us that in the 
first century A.D. Seleucia had not "lapsed into the barbarous usages of the Parthians, but still 

retained the institutions of Seleucus, s£_its Greek founder. Three hundred citizens, chosen for 
their wealth or wisdom, compose as it were a Senate; the populace too have their share of 
power." a€j Throughout Mesopotamia, as further West, Greek 


* Quoted in Bevan, House of Seleucus, Vol. I, p. 298n. 
a 

g The king, not the astronomer, 
a 

€ Annals, Book VI, Ch. 42. 
i 


- 222 - 


became the language of literature and culture, and remained so until the Mohammedan 
conquest. 

Syria (excluding Judea) became completely Hellenized in the cities, in so far as language and 
literature were concerned. But the rural populations, which were more conservative, retained 
the religions and the languages to which they were accustomed. Mn Asia Minor, the Greek 
cities of the coast had, for centuries, had an influence on their barbarian neighbours. This was 
intensified by the Macedonian conquest. The first conflict of Hellenism with the Jews is related 
in the Books of the Maccabees. It is a profoundly interesting story, unlike anything else in the 
Macedonian Empire. I shall deal with it at a later stage, when I come to the origin and growth of 
Christianity. Elsewhere, Greek influence encountered no such stubborn opposition. 

From the point of view of Hellenistic culture, the most brilliant success of the third century 
B.C. was the city of Alexandria. Egypt was less exposed to war than the European and Asiatic 
parts of the Macedonian domain, and Alexandria was in an extraordinarily favoured position for 
commerce. The Ptolemies were patrons of learning, and attracted to their capital many of the 
best men of the age. Mathematics became, and remained until the fall of Rome, mainly 
Alexandrian. Archimedes, it is true, was a Sicilian, and belonged to the one part of the world 
where the Greek City States (until the moment of his death in 212 B.C.) retained their 
independence; but he too had studied in Alexandria. Eratosthenes was chief librarian of the 
famous library of Alexandria. The mathematicians and men of science connected, more or less 
closely, with Alexandria in the third century before Christ were as able as any of the Greeks of 
the previous centuries, and did work of equal importance. But they were not, like their 
predecessors, men who took all learning for their province, and propounded universal 
philosophies; they were specialists in the modern sense. Euclid, Aristarchus, Archimedes, and 
Apollonius, were content to be mathematicians; in philosophy they did not aspire to originality. 

Specialization characterized the age in all departments, not only in the world of learning. In the 
self-governing Greek cities of the fifth and fourth centuries, a capable man was assumed to be 
capable of 


* See Cambridge Ancient History, Vol. VII, pp. 194-5. 


- 223 - 


everything. He would be, as occasion arose, a soldier, a politician, a lawgiver, or a philosopher. 
Socrates, though he disliked politics, could not avoid being mixed up with political disputes. In 
his youth he was a soldier, and (in spite of his disclaimer in the Apology ) a student of physical 
science. Protagoras, when he could spare time from teaching scepticism to aristocratic youths in 
search of the latest thing, was drawing up a code of laws for Thurii. Plato dabbled in politics, 
though unsuccessfully. Xenophon, when he was neither writing about Socrates nor being a 
country gentleman, spent his spare time as a general. Pythagorean mathematicians attempted to 
acquire the government of cities. Everybody had to serve on juries and perfonn various other 
public duties. In the third century all this was changed. There continued, it is true, to be politics in 
the old City States, but they had become parochial and unimportant, since Greece was at the 
mercy of Macedonian armies. The serious struggles for power were between Macedonian soldiers; 
they involved no question of principle, but merely the distribution of territory between rival 
adventurers. On administrative and technical matters, these more or less uneducated soldiers 
employed Greeks as experts; in Egypt, for example, excellent work was done in irrigation and 
drainage. There were soldiers, administrators, physicians, mathematicians, philosophers, but there 
was no one who was all these at once. 

The age was one in which a man who had money and no desire for power could enjoy a very 
pleasant life— always assuming that no marauding army happened to come his way. Learned men 
who found favour with some prince could enjoy a high degree of luxury, provided they were 
adroit flatterers and did not mind being the butt of ignorant royal witticisms. But there was no 
such thing as security. A palace revolution might displace the sycophantic sage's patron; the 
Galatians might destroy the rich man’s villa; one's city might be sacked as an incident in a dynastic 
war. In such circumstances it is no wonder that people took to worshipping the goddess Fortune, 
or Luck. There seemed nothing rational in the ordering of human affairs. Those who obstinately 
insisted upon finding rationality somewhere withdrew into themselves, and decided, like Milton's 
Satan, that 

The mind is its own place, and in itself Can make a heaven of hell, a hell of heaven. 


- 224 - 



Except for adventurous self-seekers, there was no longer any incentive to take an interest in 
public affairs. After the brilliant episode of Alexander's conquests, the Hellenistic world was 
sinking into chaos, for lack of a despot strong enough to achieve stable supremacy, or a 
principle powerful enough to produce social cohesion. Greek intelligence, confronted with new 
political problems, showed complete incompetence. The Romans, no doubt, were stupid and 
brutal compared to the Greeks, but at least they created order. The old disorder of the days of 
freedom had been tolerable, because every citizen had a share in it; but the new Macedonian 
disorder, imposed upon subjects by incompetent rulers, was utterly intolerable— far more so than 
the subsequent subjection to Rome. 

There was widespread social discontent and fear of revolution. The wages of free labour fell, 
presumably owing to the competition of eastern slave labour; and meantime the prices of 
necessaries rose. One finds Alexander, at the outset of his enterprise, having time to make 
treaties designed to keep the poor in their place. "In the treaties made in 335 between Alexander 
and the States of the League of Corinth it was provided that the Council of the League and 
Alexander’s representative were to see to it that in no city of the League should there be either 
confiscation of personal property, or division of land, or cancellation of debt, or liberation of 
slaves for the purpose of revolution." f_The temples, in the Hellenistic world, were the bankers; 
they owned the gold reserve, and controlled credit. In the early third century, the temple of 

Apollo at Delos made loans at ten per cent; formerly, the rate of interest had been higher. h£_ 

Tree labourers who found wages insufficient even for bare necessities must, if young and 
vigorous, have been able to obtain employment as mercenaries. The life of a mercenary, no 
doubt, was filled with hardships and dangers, but it also had great possibilities. There might be 
the loot of some rich eastern city; there might be a chance of lucrative mutiny. It must have 
been dangerous for a commander to attempt to disband his army, and this must have been one 
of the reasons why wars were almost continuous. 


* The Social Question in theThird Century, by W. W. Tarn, in The Hellenistic Age by 
various authors. Cambridge, 1923. This essay is exceedingly interesting, and contains 
many facts not elsewhere readily accessible. 


a 



- 225 - 


The old civic spirit more or less survived in the old Greek cities, but not in the new cities 
founded by Alexander— not excepting Alexandria. In earlier times, a new city was always a 
colony composed of emigrants from some one older city, and it remained connected with its 
parent by a bond of sentiment. This kind of sentiment had great longevity, as is shown, for 
example, by the diplomatic activities of Lampsacus on the Hellespont in the year 196 B.C. This 
city was threatened with subjugation by the Seleucid King Antiochus III, and decided to appeal 
to Rome for protection. An embassy was sent, but it did not go direct to Rome; it went first, in 
spite of the immense distance, to Marseilles, which, like Lampsacus, was a colony of Phocaea, 
and was, moreover, viewed with friendly eyes by the Romans. The citizens of Marseilles, 
having listened to an oration by the envoy, at once decided to send a diplomatic mission of their 
own to Rome to support their sister city. The Gauls who lived inland from Marseilles joined in 
with a letter to their kinsmen of Asia Minor, the Galatians, recommending Lampsacus to their 
friendship. Rome, naturally, was glad of a pretext for meddling in the affairs of Asia Minor, and 
by Rome's intervention Lampsacus preserved its freedom— until it became inconvenient to the 
Romans. 

In general, the rulers of Asia called themselves "Phil-Hellene," and befriended the old Greek 
cities as far as policy and military necessity allowed. The cities desired, and (when they could) 
claimed as a right, democratic self-government, absence of tribute, and freedom from a royal 
garrison. It was worth while to conciliate them, because they were rich, they could supply 
mercenaries, and many of them had important harbours. But if they took the wrong side in a 
civil war, they exposed themselves to sheer conquest. On the whole, the Seleucids, and the 
other dynasties which gradually grew up, dealt tolerably with them, but there were exceptions. 

The new cities, though they had a measure of self-government, had not the same traditions as 
the older ones. Their citizens were not of homogeneous origin, but were from all parts of 
Greece. They were in the main adventurers, like the conquistadores or the settlers in 
Johannesburg, not pious pilgrims like the earlier Greek colonists or the New England pioneers. 
Consequently no one of Alexander's 


* Bevan, House of Seleucus, Vol. II, pp. 45-6. 


- 226 - 


cities formed a strong political unit. This was convenient from the standpoint of the king's 
government, but a weakness from the standpoint of the spread of Hellenism. 

The influence of non-Greek religion and superstition in the Hellenistic world was mainly, but 
not wholly, bad. This might not have been the case. Jews, Persians, and Buddhists all had 
religions that were very definitely superior to the popular Greek polytheism, and could even 
have been studied with profit by the best philosophers. Unfortunately it was the Babylonians, or 
Chaldeans, who most impressed the imagination of the Greeks. There was, first of all, their 
fabulous antiquity; the priestly records went back for thousands of years, and professed to go 
back for thousands more. Then there was some genuine wisdom: the Babylonians could more or 
less predict eclipses long before the Greeks could. But these were merely causes of 
receptiveness; what was received was mainly astrology and magic. "Astrology," says Professor 
Gilbert Murray, "fell upon the Hellenistic mind as a new disease falls upon some remote island 
people. The tomb of Ozymandias, as described by Diodorus, was covered with astrological 
symbols, and that of Antiochus I, which has been discovered in Commagene, is of the same 
character. It was natural for monarchs to believe that the stars watched over them. But every 
one was ready to receive the germ." Mt appears that astrology was first taught to the Greeks in 
the time of Alexander, by a Chaldean named Berosus, who taught in Cos, and, according to 
Seneca, "interpreted Bel." "This," says Professor Murray, "must mean that he translated into 
Greek the 'Eye of Bel,' a treatise in seventy tablets found in the library of Assur-bani-pal ( 686- 
26 B.C.) but composed for Sargon I in the third millennium B.C." (ib. p. 176). 

As we shall see, the majority even of the best philosophers fell in with the belief in astrology. It 
involved, since it thought the future predictable, a belief in necessity or fate, which could be set 
against the prevalent belief in fortune. No doubt most men believed in both, and never noticed 
the inconsistency. 

The general confusion was bound to bring moral decay, even more than intellectual 
enfeeblement. Ages of prolonged uncertainty, while they are compatible with the highest degree 
of saintliness in a few, 


* Five Stages of Greek Religion, pp. 177-8. 


- 227 - 


are inimical to the prosaic every-day virtues of respectable citizens. There seems no use in 
thrift, when tomorrow all your savings may be dissipated; no advantage in honesty, when the 
man towards whom you practise it is pretty sure to swindle you; no point in steadfast adherence 
to a cause, when no cause is important or has a chance of stable victory; no argument in favour 
of truthfulness, when only supple tergiversation makes the preservation of life and fortune 
possible. The man whose virtue has no source except a purely terrestrial prudence will, in such 
a world, become an adventurer if he has the courage, and, if not, will seek obscurity as a timid 
time-server. 

Menander, who belongs to this age, says: 

So many cases I have known Of men who, though not naturally rogues, Became so, through 

misfortune, by constraint. 

This sums up the moral character of the third century B.C., except for a few exceptional men. 
Even among these few, fear took the place of hope; the purpose of life was rather to escape 
misfortune than to achieve any positive good. "Metaphysics sink into the background, and 
ethics, now individual, become of the first importance. Philosophy is no longer the pillar of fire 
going before a few intrepid seekers after truth: it is rather an ambulance following in the wake 
of the struggle for existence and picking up the weak and wounded." 

CHAPTER XXVI Cynics and Sceptics 

THE relation of intellectually eminent men to contemporary society has been very different in 
different ages. In some fortunate epochs they have been on the whole in harmony with their 
surroundings— suggesting, no doubt, such reforms as seemed to them necessary, but fairly 
confident that their suggestions would 


* C. F. Angus in Cambridge Ancient History, Vol. VII, p. 231. The above quotation from 
Menander is taken from the same chapter. 


- 228 - 


be welcomed, and not disliking the world in which they found themselves even if it remained 
unreformed. At other times they have been revolutionary, considering that radical alterations were 
called for, but expecting that, partly as a result of their advocacy, these alterations would be 
brought about in the near future. At yet other times they have despaired of the world, and felt that, 
though they themselves knew what was needed, there was no hope of its being brought about. 

This mood si nk s easily into the deeper despair which regards life on earth as essentially bad, and 
hopes for good only in a future life or in some mystical transfiguration. 

In some ages, all these attitudes have been adopted by different men living at the same time. 
Consider, for example, the early nineteenth century. Goethe is comfortable, Bentham is a 
reformer, Shelley is a revolutionary, and Leopardi is a pessimist. But in most periods there has 
been a prevailing tone among great writers. In England they were comfortable under Elizabeth and 
in the eighteenth century; in France, they became revolutionary about 1750; in Gennany, they 
have been nationalistic since 1813. 

During the period of ecclesiastical domination, from the fifth century to the fifteenth, there was a 
certain conflict between what was theoretically believed and what was actually felt. Theoretically, 
the world was a vale of tears, a preparation, amid tribulation, for the world to come. But in 
practice the writers of books, being almost all clerics, could not help feeling exhilarated by the 
power of the Church; they found opportunity for abundant activity of a sort that they believed to 
be useful. They had therefore the mentality of a governing class, not of men who feel themselves 
exiles in an alien world. This is part of the curious dualism that runs through the Middle Ages, 
owing to the fact that the Church, though based on other-worldly beliefs, was the most important 
institution in the every-day world. 

The psychological preparation for the other-worldliness of Christianity begins in the Hellenistic 
period, and is connected with the eclipse of the City State. Down to Aristotle, Greek philosophers, 
though they might complain of this or that, were, in the main, not cosmically despairing, nor did 
they feel themselves politically impotent. They might, at times, belong to a beaten party, but, if so, 
their defeat was due to the chances of conflict, not to any inevitable powerlessness of the wise. 
Even those who, like Pythagoras, and Plato 


- 229 - 



in certain moods, condemned the world of appearance and sought escape in mysticism, had 
practical plans for turning the governing classes into saints and sages. When political power 
passed into the hands of the Macedonians, Greek philosophers, as was natural, turned aside from 
politics and devoted themselves more to the problem of individual virtue or salvation. They no 
longer asked: how can men create a good State? They asked instead: how can men be virtuous in a 
wicked world, or happy in a world of suffering? The change, it is true is only one of degree; such 
questions had been asked before, and the later Stoics, for a time, again concerned themselves with 
politics —the politics of Rome, not of Greece. But the change was none the less real. Except to a 
limited extent during the Roman period in Stoicism, the outlook of those who thought and felt 
seriously became increasingly subjective and individualistic, until, at last, Christianity evolved a 
gospel of individual salvation which inspired missionary zeal and created the Church. Until that 
happened, there was no institution to which the philosopher could give whole-hearted adherence, 
and therefore there was no adequate outlet for his legitimate love of power. For this reason, the 
philosophers of the Hellenistic period are more limited as human beings than the men who lived 
while the City State could still inspire allegiance. They still think, because they cannot help 
thinking; but they scarcely hope that their thought will bear fruit in the world of affairs. 

Four schools of philosophy were founded about the time of Alexander. The two most famous, the 
Stoics and Epicureans, will be the subjects of later chapters; in the present chapter we shall be 
concerned with the Cynics and Sceptics. 

The first of these schools is derived, through its founder Diogenes, from Antisthenes, a disciple of 
Socrates, about twenty years older than Plato. Antisthenes was a remarkable character, in some 
ways rather like Tolstoy. Until after the death of Socrates, he lived in the aristocratic circle of his 
fellow disciples, and showed no sign of unorthodoxy. But something— whether the defeat of 
Athens, or the death of Socrates, or a distaste for philosophic quibbling— caused him, when no 
longer young, to despise the things that he had formerly valued. He would have nothing but 
simple goodness. He associated with working men, and dressed as one of them. He took to open- 
air preaching, in a style that the uneducated could understand. All refined 


- 230 - 



philosophy he held to be worthless; what could be known, could be known by the plain man. He 
believed in the "return to nature," and carried this belief very far. There was to be no 
government, no private property, no marriage, no established religion. His followers, if not he 
himself, condemned slavery. He was not exactly ascetic, but he despised luxury and all pursuit 
of artificial pleasures of the senses. "I had rather be mad than delighted," he said. 

The fame of Antisthenes was surpassed by that of his disciple Diogenes, "a young man from 
Sinope, on the Euxine, whom he [ Antisthenes] did not take to at first sight; the son of a 
disreputable money-changer who had been sent to prison for defacing the coinage. Antisthenes 
ordered the lad away, but he paid no attention; he beat him with his stick, but he never moved. 
He wanted ’wisdom,’ and saw that Antisthenes had it to give. His aim in life was to do as his 
father had done, to ’deface the coinage,' but on a much larger scale. He would deface all the 
coinage current in the world. Every conventional stamp was false. The men stamped as generals 
and kings; the things stamped as honour and wisdom and happiness and riches; all were base 

metal with lying superscription." 

He decided to live like a dog, and was therefore called a "cynic," which means "canine." He 
rejected all conventions— whether of religion, of manners, of dress, of housing, of food, or of 
decency. One is told that he lived in a tub, but Gilbert Murray assures us that this is a mistake: it 
was a large pitcher, of the sort used in primitive times for burials. a€j He lived, like an Indian 
fakir, by begging. He proclaimed his brotherhood, not only with the whole human race, but also 
with animals. He was a man about whom stories gathered, even in his lifetime. Every one 
knows how Alexander visited him, and asked if he desired any favour; "only to stand out of my 
light," he replied. 

The teaching of Diogenes was by no means what we now call "cynical"— quite the contrary. He 
had an ardent passion for "virtue," in comparison with which he held worldly goods of no 
account. He sought virtue and moral freedom in liberation from desire: be indifferent to the 
goods that fortune has to bestow, and you will be emancipated from fear. In this respect, his 
doctrine, as we shall see, was 


* Benn, Vol. II, pp. 4, 5; Murray, Five Stages, pp. 1 13-14. 
a 

g Murray, Five Stages, p. 117. 
a 

€ Murray, Five Stages, p. 119. 
i 


- 231 - 


taken up by the Stoics, but they did not follow him in rejecting the amenities of civilization. He 
considered that Prometheus was justly punished for bringing to man the arts that have produced 
the complication and artificiality of modern life. In this he resembled the Taoists and Rousseau 
and Tolstoy, but was more consistent than they were. 

His doctrine, though he was a contemporary of Aristotle, belongs in its temper to the Hellenistic 
age. Aristotle is the last Greek philosopher who faces the world cheerfully; after him, all have, 
in one form or another, a philosophy of retreat. The world is bad; let us learn to be independent 
of it. External goods are precarious; they are the gift of fortune, not the reward of our own 
efforts. Only subjective goods —virtue, or contentment through resignation— are secure, and 
these alone, therefore, will be valued by the wise man. Diogenes personally was a man full of 
vigour, but his doctrine, like all those of the Hellenistic age, was one to appeal to weary men, in 
whom disappointment had destroyed natural zest. And it was certainly not a doctrine calculated 
to promote at or science or statesmanship, or any useful activity except one of protest against 
powerful evil. 

It is interesting to observe what the Cynic teaching became when it was popularized. In the 
early part of the third century B.C., the Cynics were the fashion, especially in Alexandria. They 
published little sermons pointing out how easy it is to do without material possessions, how 
happy one can be on simple food, how warm one can keep in winter without expensive clothes 
(which might be true in Egypt!), how silly it is to feel affection for one's native country, or to 
mourn when one's children or friends die. "Because my son or my wife is dead," says Teles, 
who was one of these popularizing Cynics, "is that any reason for my neglecting myself, who 
am still alive, and ceasing to look after my property?" ^_At this point, it becomes difficult to 
feel any sympathy with the simple life, which has grown altogether too simple. One wonders 
who enjoyed these sermons. Was it the rich, who wished to think the sufferings of the poor 
imaginary? Or was it the new poor, who were trying to despise the successful business man? Or 
was it sycophants who persuaded themselves that the charity they accepted was unimportant? 
Teles says to a rich man: 


* The Hellenistic Age ( Cambridge, 1923), p. 84 ff. 


- 232 - 


"You give liberally and I take valiantly from you, neither grovelling nor demeaning myself 
basely nor grumbling." ^_A very convenient doctrine. Popular Cynicism did not teach 
abstinence from the good things of this world, but only a certain indifference to them. In the 
case of a borrower, this might take the form of minimizing the obligation to the lender. One can 
see how the word "cynic" acquired its every-day meaning. 

What was best in the Cynic doctrine passed over into Stoicism, which was an altogether more 
complete and rounded philosophy. 

Scepticism, as a doctrine of the schools, was first proclaimed by Pyrrho, who was in 
Alexander’s anny, and campaigned with it as far as India. It seems that this gave him a 
sufficient taste of travel, and. that he spent the rest of his life in his native city, Elis, where he 
died in 275 B.C. There was not much that was new in his doctrine, beyond a certain 
systematizing and formalizing of older doubts. Scepticism with regard to the senses had 
troubled Greek philosophers from a very early stage; the only exceptions were those who, like 
Pannenides and Plato, denied the cognitive value of perception, and made their denial into an 
opportunity for an intellectual dogmatism. The Sophists, notably Protagoras and Gorgias, had 
been led by the ambiguities and. apparent contradictions of sense-perception to a subjectivism 
not unlike Hume’s. Pyrrho seems (for he very wisely wrote no books) to have added moral and 
logical scepticism to scepticism as to the senses. He is said to have maintained that there could 
never be any rational, ground for preferring one course of action to another. In practice, this 
meant that one confonned to the customs of whatever countryone inhabited. A modern disciple 
would go to church on Sundays and. perform the correct genuflexions, but without any of the 
religious beliefs that are supposed to inspire these actions. Ancient Sceptics went through the 
whole pagan ritual, and were even sometimes priests; their Scepticism assured them that this 
behaviour could not be proved wrong, and their common sense (which survived their 
philosophy) assured them that it was convenient. 

Scepticism naturally made an appeal to many unphilosophic minds. People observed the 
diversity of schools and the acerbity of their disputes, and decided that all alike were pretending 
to knowledge which 


* The Hellenistic Age ( Cambridge, 1923), p. 86. 


- 233 - 


was in fact unattainable. Scepticism was a lazy man’s consolation, since it showed the ignorant 
to be as wise as the reputed men of learning. To men who, by temperament, required a gospel, it 
might seem unsatisfying, but like every doctrine of the Hellenistic period it recommended itself 
as an antidote to worry. Why trouble about the future? It is wholly uncertain. You may as well 
enjoy the present; "What’s to come is still unsure." For these reasons, Scepticism enjoyed a 
considerable popular success. 

It should be observed that Scepticism as a philosophy is not merely doubt, but what may be 
called dogmatic doubt. The man of science says "I think it is so-and-so, but I am not sure." The 
man of intellectual curiosity says "I don't kn ow how it is, but I hope to find out." The 
philosophical Sceptic says "nobody kn ows, and nobody ever can know." It is this element of 
dogmatism that makes the system vulnerable. Sceptics, of course, deny that they assert the 
impossibility of knowledge dogmatically, but their denials are not very convincing. 

Pyrrho's disciple Timon, however, advanced some intellectual arguments which, from the 
standpoint of Greek logic, were very hard to answer. The only logic admitted by the Greeks was 
deductive, and all deduction had to start, like Euclid, from general principles regarded as self- 
evident. Timon denied the possibility of finding such principles. Everything, therefore, will 
have to be proved by means of something else, and all argument will be either circular or an 
endless chain hanging from nothing. In either case nothing can be proved. This argument, as we 
can see, cut at the root of the Aristotelian philosophy which dominated the Middle Ages. 

Some forms of Scepticism which, in our own day, are advocated by men who are by no means 
wholly sceptical, had not occurred to the Sceptics of antiquity. They did not doubt phenomena, 
or question propositions which, in their opinion, only expressed what we know directly 
concerning phenomena. Most of Timon's work is lost, but two surviving fragments will 
illustrate this point. One says "The phenomenon is always valid." The other says: "That honey is 
sweet I refuse to assert; that it appears sweet, I fully grant." f_A modem Sceptic would point out 
that the phenomenon merely occurs, and is not either valid or invalid; what is valid or invalid 
must be a state- 


* Quoted by Edwyn Bevan, Stoics and Sceptics, p. 126. 


- 234 - 


ment, and no statement can be so closely linked to the phenomenon as to be incapable of 
falsehood. For the same reason, he would say that the statement "honey appears sweet" is only 
highly probable, not absolutely certain. 

In some respects, the doctrine of Timon was very similar to that of Hume. He maintained that 
something which had never been observed— atoms, for instance— could not be validly inferred; but 
when two phenomena had been frequently observed together, one could be inferred from the 
other. 

Timon lived at Athens throughout the later years of his long life, and died there in 235 B.C. With 
his death, the school of Pyrrho, as a school, came to an end, but his doctrines, somewhat modified, 
were taken up, strange as it may seem, by the Academy, which represented the Platonic tradition. 

The man who effected this surprising philosophic revolution was Arcesilaus, a contemporary of T 
imon, who died as an old man about 240 B.C. What most men have taken from Plato is belief in a 
supersensible intellectual world and in the superiority of the immortal soul to the mortal body. But 
Plato was many-sided, and in some respects could be regarded as teaching scepticism. The 
Platonic Socrates professes to know nothing; we naturally treat this as irony, but it could be taken 
seriously. Many of the dialogues reach no positive conclusion, and aim at leaving the reader in a 
state of doubt. Some— the latter half of the Parmenides, for instance— might seem to have no 
purpose except to show that either side of any question can be maintained with equal plausibility. 
The Platonic dialectic could be treated as an end, rather than a means, and if so treated it lent itself 
admirably to the advocacy of Scepticism. This seems to have been the way in which Arcesilaus 
interpreted the man whom he still professed to follow. He had decapitated Plato, but at any rate 
the torso that remained was genuine. 

The manner in which Arcesilaus taught would have had much to commend it, if the young men 
who learnt from him had been able to avoid being paralysed by it. He maintained no thesis, but 
would refute any thesis set up by a pupil. Sometimes he would himself advance two contradictory 
propositions on successive occasions, showing how to argue convincingly in favour of either. A 
pupil sufficiently vigourous to rebel might have leamt dexterity and the avoidance of fallacies; 


- 235 - 



in fact, none seem to have learnt anything except cleverness and indifference to truth. So great 
was the influence of Arcesilaus that the Academy remained sceptical for about two hundred years. 

In the middle of this sceptical period, an amusing incident occurred. Carneades, a worthy 
successor of Arcesilaus as head of the Academy, was one of three philosophers sent by Athens on 
a diplomatic mission to Rome in the year 156 B.C. He saw no reason why his ambassadorial 
dignity should interfere with the main chance, so he announced a course of lectures in Rome. The 
young men, who, at that time, were anxious to ape Greek manners and acquire Greek culture, 
flocked to hear him. His first lecture expounded the views of Aristotle and Plato on justice, and 
was thoroughly edifying. His second, however, was concerned in refuting all that he had said in 
his first, not with a view to establishing opposite conclusions, but merely to show that every 
conclusion is unwarranted. Plato's Socrates had argued that to inflict injustice was a greater evil to 
the perpetrator than to suffer it. Carneades, in his second lecture, treated this contention with 
scorn. Great States, he pointed out, had become great by unjust aggressions against their weaker 
neighbours; in Rome, this could not well be denied. In a shipwreck, you may save your life at the 
expense of some one weaker, and you are a fool if you do not. "Women and children first," he 
seems to think, is not a maxim that leads to personal survival. What would you do if you were 
flying from a victorious enemy, you had lost your horse, but you found a wounded comrade on a 
horse? If you were sensible, you would drag him off and seize his horse, whatever justice might 
ordain. All this not very edifying argumentation is surprising in a nominal follower of Plato, but it 
seems to have pleased the modern-minded Roman youths. 

There was one man whom it did not please and that was the elder Cato, who represented the stem, 
stiff, stupid, and brutal moral code by means of which Rome had defeated Carthage. From youth 
to old age, he lived simply, rose early, practised severe manual labour, ate only coarse food, and 
never wore a gown that cost over a hundred pence. Towards the State he was scrupulously honest, 
avoiding all bribery and plunder. He exacted of other Romans all the virtues that he practised 
himself, and asserted that to accuse and pursue the wicked was the best thing an honest man could 
do. He enforced, as far as he could, the old Roman severity of manners: 


- 236 - 



" Cato put out of the Senate also, one Manilius, who was in great towardness to have been made 
Consul the next year following, only because he kissed his wife too lovingly in the day time, 
and before his daughter: and reproving him for it, he told him, his wife never kissed him, but 
when it thundered." 

When he was in power, he put down luxury and feasting. He made his wife suckle not only her 
own children, but also those of his slaves, in order that, having been nourished by the same 
milk, they might love his children. When his slaves were too old to work, he sold them 
remorselessly. He insisted that his slaves should always be either working or sleeping. He 
encouraged his slaves to quarrel with each other, for "he could not abide that they should be 
friends." When a slave had committed a grave fault, he would call in his other slaves, and 
induce them to condemn the delinquent to death; he would then carry out the sentence with his 
own hands in the presence of the survivors. 

The contrast between Cato and Cameades was very complete: the one brutal through a morality 
that was too strict and too traditional, the other ignoble through a morality that was too lax and 
too much infected with the social dissolution of the Hellenistic world. 

" Marcus Cato, even from the beginning that young men began to study the Greek tongue, and 
that it grew in estimation in Rome, did dislike of it: fearing lest the youth of Rome that were 
desirous of learning and eloquence, would utterly give over the honour and glory of arms. . . . 

So he openly found fault one day in the Senate, that the Ambassadors were long there, and had 
no dispatch: considering also they were cunning men, and could easily persuade what they 
would. And if there were no other respect, this only might persuade them to determine some 
answer for them, and to send them home again to their schools, to teach their children of 
Greece, and to let alone the children of Rome, that they might learn to obey the laws and the 
Senate, as they had done before. Now he spake thus to the Senate, not of any private ill will or 
malice he bare to Cameades, as some men thought: but because he generally hated philosophy." 
a€_ 

The Athenians, in Cato's view, were a lesser breed without the law; it did not matter if they 
were degraded by the shallow sophistics of intellectuals, but the Roman youth must be kept 
puritanical, im- 


* North's Plutarch, Lives, Marcus Cato, 
a 


- 237 - 


perialistic, ruthless, and stupid. He failed, however; later Romans, while retaining many of his 
vices, adopted those of Carneades also. 

The next head of the Academy, after Carneades ( ca . 180 to ca. 1 10 B.C.), was a Carthaginian 
whose real name was Hasdrubal, but who, in his dealings with Greeks, preferred to call himself 
Clitomachus. Unlike Carneades, who confined himself to lecturing, Clitomachus wrote over four 
hundred books, some of them in the Phoenician language. His principles appear to have been the 
same as those of Carneades. In some respects, they were useful. These two Sceptics set 
themselves against the belief in divination, magic, and astrology, which was becoming more and 
more widespread. They also developed a constructive doctrine, concerning degrees of probability; 
although we can never be justified in feeling certainty, some things are more likely to be true than 
others. Probability should be our guide in practice, since it is reasonable to act on the most 
probable of possible hypotheses. This view is one with which most modern philosophers would 
agree. Unfortunately, the books setting it forth are lost, and it is difficult to reconstruct the 
doctrine from the hints that remain. 

After Clitomachus, the Academy ceased to be sceptical, and from the time of Antiochus (who died 
in 69 B.C.) its doctrines became, for centuries, practically indistinguishable from those of the 
Stoics. 

Scepticism, however, did not disappear. It was revived by the Cretan Aenesidemus, who came 
from Knossos, where, for aught we know, there may have been Sceptics two thousand years 
earlier, entertaining dissolute courtiers with doubts as to the divinity of the mistress of animals. 
The date of Aenesidemus is uncertain. He threw over the doctrines on probability advocated by 
Carneades, and reverted to the earliest forms of Scepticism. His influence was considerable; he 
was followed by the poet Lucian in the second century A.D., and also, slightly later, by Sextus 
Empiricus, the only Sceptic philosopher of antiquity whose works survive. There is, for example, 
a short treatise, " Arguments Against Belief in a God, " translated by Edwyn Bevan in his Later 
Greek Religion, pp. 52-56, and said by him to be probably taken by Sextus Empiricus from 
Carneades, as reported by Clitomachus. 

This treatise begins by explaining that, in behaviour, the Sceptics are orthodox: "We sceptics 
follow in practice the way of the world, but without holding any opinion about it. We speak of the 
Gods 


- 238 - 



as existing and offer worship to the Gods and say that they exercise providence, but in saying this 
we express no belief, and avoid the rashness of the dogmatisers." 


He then argues that people differ as to the nature of God; for instance, some think Him corporeal, 
some incorporeal. Since we have no experience of Him, we cannot know His attributes. The 
existence of God is not self-evident, and therefore needs proof. There is a somewhat confused 
argument to show that no such proof is possible. He next takes up the problem of evil, and 
concludes with the words: 

"Those who affirm positively that God exists cannot avoid falling into an impiety. For if they say 
that God controls everything, they make Him the author of evil things; if, on the other hand, they 
say that He controls some things only, or that He controls nothing, they are compelled to make 
God either grudging or impotent, and to do that is quite obviously an impiety." 

Scepticism, while it continued to appeal to some cultivated individuals until somewhere in the 
third century A.D., was contrary to the temper of the age, which was turning more and more to 
dogmatic religion and doctrines of salvation. Scepticism had enough force to make educated men 
dissatisfied with the State religions, but it had nothing positive, even in the purely intellectual 
sphere, to offer in their place. From the Renaissance onwards, theological scepticism has been 
supplemented, in most of its advocates, by an enthusiastic belief in science, but in antiquity there 
was no such supplement to doubt. Without answering the arguments of the Sceptics, the ancient 
world turned aside from them. The Olympians being discredited, the way was left clear for an 
invasion of oriental religions, which competed for the favour of the superstitious until the triumph 
of Christianity. 


-239- 

CHAPTER XXVII The Epicureans 

two great new schools of the Hellenistic period, the Stoics and Epicureans, were 
contemporaneous in their foundation. Their founders, Zeno and Epicurus, were bom at about 
the same time, and settled in Athens as heads of their respective sects within a few years of each 
other. It is therefore a matter of taste which to consider first. I shall begin with the Epicureans, 
because their doctrines were fixed once for all by their founder, whereas Stoicism had a long 
development, extending as far as the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, who died in A.D. 180. 

The main authority for the life of Epicurus is Diogenes Laertius, who lived in the third century 
A.D. There are, however, two difficulties: first, Diogenes Laertius is himself ready to accept 
legends of little or no historical value; second, part of his Life consists in reporting the 
scandalous accusations brought against Epicurus by the Stoics, and it is not always clear 
whether he is asserting something himself or merely mentioning a libel. The scandals invented 
by the Stoics are facts about them, to be remembered when their lofty morality is praised; but 
they are not facts about Epicurus. For instance, there was a legend that his mother was a quack 
priestess, as to which Diogenes says: 

"They (apparently the Stoics) say that he used to go round from house to house with his mother 
reading out the purification prayers, and assisted his father in elementary teaching for a 
miserable pittance." 

On this Bailey comments: "If there is any truth in the story that he went about with his mother 
as an acolyte, reciting the fonnulae of her incantations, he may well have been inspired in quite 
early 



* The Greek Atomists and Epicurus, by Cyril Bailey, Oxford 1928, p. 221. Mr. Bailey has 
made a specialty of Epicurus, and his book is invaluable to the student. 

-240- 

years with the hatred of superstition, which was afterwards so prominent a feature in his 
teaching." This theory is attractive, but, in view of the extreme unscrupulousness of later 
antiquity in inventing a scandal, I do not think it can be accepted as having any foundation. * 

There is against it the fact that he had an unusually strong affection for his mother. 

The main facts of the life of Epicurus seem, however, fairly certain. His father was a poor 
Athenian colonist in Samos; Epicurus was bom in 342-1 B.C., but whether in Samos or in 
Attica is not known. In any case, his boyhood was passed in Samos. He states that he took to the 
study of philosophy at the age of fourteen. At the age of eighteen, about the time of Alexander's 
death, he went to Athens, apparently to establish his citizenship, but while he was there the 
Athenian colonists were turned out of Samos ( 322 B.C.). The family of Epicurus became 
refugees in Asia Minor, where he rejoined them. At Taos, either at this time, or perhaps earlier, 
he was taught philosophy by a certain Nausiphanes, apparently a follower of Democritus. 
Although his mature philosophy owes more to Democritus than to any other philosopher, he 
never expressed anything but contempt for Nausiphanes, whom he alluded to as "The Mollusc." 

In the year 3 1 1 he founded his school, which was first in Mitylene, then in Lampsacus, and, 
from 307 onwards, in Athens, where he died in 270-1 B.C. 

After the hard years of his youth, his life in Athens was placid, and was only troubled by his ill 
health. He had a house and a garden (apparently separate from the house), and it was in the 
garden that he taught. His three brothers, and some others, had been members of his school 
from the first, but in Athens his community was increased, not only by philosophic disciples, 
but by friends and their children, slaves and betaerae. These last were made an occasion of 
scandal by his enemies, but apparently quite unjustly. He had a very exceptional capacity for 
purely human friendship, and wrote pleasant letters to the young children of members of the 
community. He did 


* The Stoics were very unjust to Epicurus. Epictetus, for example, addressing him, says: 
"This is the life of which you pronounce yourself worthy: eating, drinking, copulation, 
evacuation and snoring." Bk. II, Chap. XX, Discourses of Epictetus. 

a 

^ Murray, Five Stages, p. 130. 


- 241 - 


not practise that dignity and reserve in the expression of the emotions that was expected of 
ancient philosophers; his letters are amazingly natural and unaffected. 

The life of the community was very simple, partly on principle, and partly (no doubt) for lack of 
money. Their food and drink was mainly bread and water, which Epicurus found quite 
satisfying. "I am thrilled with pleasure in the body," he says, "when I live on bread and water, 
and I spit on luxurious pleasures, not for their own sake, but because of the inconveniences that 
follow them." The community depended financially, at least in part, on voluntary contributions. 
"Send me some preserved cheese," he writes, "that when I like, I may have a feast." To another 
friend: "Send us offerings for the sustenance of our holy body on behalf of yourself and your 

children." And again: "The only contribution I require is that which ordered the disciples to 

send me, even if they be among the Hyperboreans. I wish to receive from each of you two 
hundred and twenty drachmae ^_a year and no more." 

Epicurus suffered all his life from bad health, but learnt to endure it with great fortitude. It was 
he, not a Stoic, who first maintained that a man could be happy on the rack. Two letters written, 
one a few days before his death, the other on the day of his death, show that he had some right 
to this opinion. The first says: "Seven days before writing this the stoppage became complete 
and I suffered pains such as bring men to their last day. If anything happens to me, do you look 
after the children of Metrodorus for four or five years, but do not spend any more on them than 
you now spend on me." The second says: "On this truly happy day of my life, as I am at the 
point of death, I write this to you. The diseases in my bladder and stomach are pursuing their 
course, lacking nothing of their usual severity: but against all this is the joy in my heart at the 
recollection of my conversations with you. Do you, as I might expect from your devotion from 
boyhood to me and to philosophy, take good care of the children of Metrodorus." Metrodorus, 
who had been one of his first disciples, was dead; Epicurus provided for his children in his will. 

Although Epicurus was gentle and kindly towards most people, a different side of his character 
appeared in his relations to philos- 


* About twenty dollars. 


- 242 - 


ophers, especially those to whom he might be considered indebted. "I suppose," he says, "that 
these grumblers will believe me to be a disciple of The Mollusc (Nausiphanes) and to have 
listened to his teaching in company with a few bibulous youths. For indeed the fellow was a bad 
man and his habits such as could never lead to wisdom." MTe never acknowledged the extent of 
his indebtedness to Democritus, and as for Leucippus, he asserted that there was no such 
philosopher-meaning, no doubt, not that there was no such man, but that the man was not a 
philosopher. Diogenes Laertius gives a whole list of abusive epithets that he is supposed to have 
applied to the most eminent of his predecessors. With this lack of generosity towards other 
philosophers goes another grave fault, that of dictatorial dogmatism. His followers had to leam 
a kind of creed embodying his doctrines, which they were not allowed to question. To the end, 
none of them added or modified anything. When Lucretius, two hundred years later, turned the 
philosophy of Epicurus into poetry, he added, so far as can be judged, nothing theoretical to the 
master's teaching. Wherever comparison is possible, Lucretius is found to agree closely with the 
original, and it is generally held that, elsewhere, he may be used to fill in the gaps in our 
knowledge caused by the loss of all of Epicurus's three hundred books. Of his writings, nothing 
remains except a few letters, some fragments, and a statement of "Principal Doctrines." 

The philosophy of Epicurus, like all those of his age (with the partial exception of Scepticism), 
was primarily designed to secure tranquillity. He considered pleasure to be the good, and 
adhered, with remarkable consistency, to all the consequences of this view. "Pleasure," he said, 
"is the beginning and end of the blessA©d life." Diogenes Laertius quotes him as saying, in a 
book on The End of Life, "I know not how I can conceive the good, if I withdraw the pleasures 
of taste and withdraw the pleasures of love and those of hearing and sight." Again: "The 
beginning and the root of all good is the pleasure of the stomach; even wisdom and culture must 
be referred to this." The pleasure of the mind, we are told, is the contemplation of pleasures of 
the body. Its only advantage over bodily pleasures is that we can learn to contemplate pleasure 
rather than pain, and thus have 


* The Stoic and Epicurean Philosophers, by W. J. Oates, p. 47. Where possible, I have 
availed myself of Mr. Oates's translations. 


- 243 - 


more control over mental than over physical pleasures. "Virtue, unless it means "prudence in 
the pursuit of pleasure," is an empty name. Justice, for example, consists in so acting as not to 
have occasion to fear other men's resentment— a view which leads to a doctrine of the origin of 
society not unlike the theory of the Social Contract. 

Epicurus disagrees with some of his hedonist predecessors in distinguishing between active and 
passive pleasures, or dynamic and static pleasures. Dynamic pleasures consist in the attainment 
of a desired end, the previous desire having been accompanied by pain. Static pleasures consist 
in a state of equilibrium, which results from the existence of the kind of state of affairs that 
would be desired if it were absent. I think one may say that the satisfying of hunger, while it is 
in progress, is a dynamic pleasure, but the state of quiescence which supervenes when hunger is 
completely satisfied is a static pleasure. Of these two kinds, Epicurus holds it more prudent to 
pursue the second, since it is unalloyed, and does not depend upon the existence of pain as a 
stimulus to desire. When the body is in a state of equilibrium, there is no pain; we should, 
therefore, aim at equilibrium and the quiet pleasures rather than at more violent joys. Epicurus, 
it seems, would wish, if it were possible, to be always in the state of having eaten moderately, 
never in that of voracious desire to eat. 

He is thus led, in practice, to regarding absence of pain, rather than presence of pleasure, as the 
wise man's goal. jyThc stomach may be at the root of things, but the pains of stomach ache 
outweigh the pleasures of gluttony; accordingly Epicurus lived on bread, with a little cheese on 
feast days. Such desires as those for wealth and honour are futile, because they make a man 
restless when he might be contented. "The greatest good of all is prudence: it is a more precious 
thing even than philosophy." Philosophy, as he understood it, was a practical system designed 
to secure a happy life; it required only common sense, not logic or mathematics or any of the 
elaborate training prescribed by Plato. He urges his young disciple and friend Pythocles to "flee 
from every form of culture." It was a natural consequence of his principles that he advised 
abstinence from public life, for in proportion as a man achieves power he increases the number 
of those who 


* (For Epicurus) "Absence of pain is in itself pleasure, indeed in his ultimate analysis the 
truest pleasure." Bailey, op. cit., p. 249. 


- 244 - 


envy him and therefore wish to do him injury. Even if he escapes outward misfortune, peace of 
mind is impossible in such a situation. The wise man will try to live unnoticed, so as to have no 
enemies. 

Sexual love, as one of the most "dynamic" of pleasures, naturally comes under the ban. "Sexual 
intercourse," the philosopher declares, "has never done a man good and he is lucky if it has not 
harmed him." He was fond of children (other people’s), but for the gratification of this taste he 
seems to have relied upon other people not to follow his advice. He seems, in fact, to have liked 
children against his better judgement; for he considered marriage and children a distraction 
from more serious pursuits. Lucretius, who follows him in denouncing love, sees no harm in 
sexual intercourse provided it is divorced from passion. 

The safest of social pleasures, in the opinion of Epicurus, is friendship. Epicurus, like Bentham, 
is a man who considers that all men, at all times, pursue only their own pleasure, sometimes 
wisely, sometimes unwisely; but, again like Bentham, he is constantly seduced by his own 
kindly and affectionate nature into admirable behaviour from which, on his own theories, he 
ought to have refrained. He obviously liked his friends without regard to what he got out of 
them, but he persuaded himself that he was as selfish as his philosophy held all men to be. 
According to Cicero, he held that "friendship cannot be divorced from pleasure, and for that 
reason must be cultivated, because without it neither can we live in safety and without fear, nor 
even pleasantly." Occasionally, however, he forgets his theories more or less: "all friendship is 
desirable in itself," he says, adding "though it starts from the need of help." 

Epicurus, though his ethic seemed to others swinish and lacking in moral exaltation, was very 
much in earnest. As we have seen, he speaks of the community in the garden as "our holy 
body"; he wrote a book On Holiness', he had all the fervour of a religious refonner. He must 
have had a strong emotion of pity for the sufferings of mankind, and an unshakeable conviction 
that they would be greatly lessened if men would adopt his philosophy. It was a valetudinarian's 
philosophy, designed to suit a world in which adventurous happiness had become scarcely 
possible. Eat little, for fear of indigestion; drink 


* On the subject of friendship and Epicurus's amiable inconsistency, see Bailey, op. cit., pp. 
517 - 20 . 


- 245 - 


little, for fear of next morning; eschew politics and love and all violently passionate activities; 
do not give hostages to fortune by marrying and having children; in your mental life, teach 
yourself to contemplate pleasures rather than pains. Physical pain is certainly a great evil, but if 
severe, it is brief, and if prolonged, it can be endured by means of mental discipline and the 
habit of thinking of happy things in spite of it. Above all, live so as to avoid fear. 

It was through the problem of avoiding fear that Epicurus was led into theoretical philosophy. 
He held that two of the greatest sources of fear were religion and the dread of death, which were 
connected, since religion encouraged the view that the dead are unhappy. He therefore sought a 
metaphysic which would prove that the gods do not interfere in human affairs, and that the soul 
perishes with the body. Most modem people think of religion as a consolation, but to Epicurus 
it was the opposite. Supernatural interference with the course of nature seemed to him a source 
of terror, and immortality fatal to the hope of release from pain. Accordingly he constructed an 
elaborate doctrine designed to cure men of the beliefs that inspire fear. 

Epicurus was a materialist, but not a determinist. He followed Democritus in believing that the 
world consists of atoms and the void; but he did not believe, as Democritus did, that the atoms 
are at all times completely controlled by natural laws. The conception of necessity in Greece 
was, as we have seen, religious in origin, and perhaps he was right in considering that an attack 
on religion would be incomplete if it allowed necessity to survive. His atoms had weight, and 
were continually falling; not towards the centre of the earth, but downwards in some absolute 
sense. Every now and then, however, an atom, actuated by something like free will, would 
swerve slightly from the direct downward path, ^_and so would come into collision with some 
other atom. From this point onwards, the development of vortices, etc. proceeded in much the 
same way as in Democritus. The soul is material, and is composed of particles like those of 
breath and heat. ( Epicurus thought breath and wind different in substance from air; they were 
not merely air in motion.) Soul-atoms are distributed throughout the body. Sensation is due to 
thin films 


* An analogous view is urged in our day by Eddington, in his interpretation of the principle 
of indeterminacy. 


- 246 - 


thrown off by bodies and travelling on until they touch soul-atoms. These films may still exist 
when the bodies from which they originally proceeded have been dissolved; this accounts for 
dreams. At death, the soul is dispersed, and its atoms, which of course survive, are no longer 
capable of sensation, because they are no longer connected with the body. It follows, in the words 
of Epicurus, that "Death is nothing to us; for that which is dissolved, is without sensation, and that 
which lacks sensation is nothing to us." 

As for the gods, Epicurus firmly believes in their existence, since he cannot otherwise account for 
the wide-spread existence of the idea of gods. But he is persuaded that they do not trouble 
themselves with the affairs of our human world. They are rational hedonists, who follow his 
precepts, and abstain from public life; government would be an unnecessary labour, to which, in 
their life of complete blessedness, they feel no temptation. Of course, divination and augury and 
all such practices are purely supers itions, and so is the belief in Providence. 

There is therefore no ground for the fear that we may incur the anger of the gods, or that we may 
suffer in Hades after death. Though subject to the powers of nature, which can be studied 
scientifically, we yet have free will, and are, within limits, the masters of our fate. We cannot 
escape death, but death, rightly understood, is no evil. If we live prudently, according to the 
maxims of Epicurus, we shall probably achieve a measure of freedom from pain. This is a 
moderate gospel, but to a man impressed with human misery it sufficed to inspire enthusiasm. 

Epicurus has no interest in science on its own account; he values it solely as providing naturalistic 
explanations of phenomena which superstition attributes to the agency of the gods. When there are 
several possible naturalistic explanations, he holds that there is no point in trying to decide 
between them. The phases of the moon, for example, have been explained in many different ways; 
any one of these, so long as it does not bring in the gods, is as good as any other, and it would be 
idle curiosity to attempt to detennine which of them is true. It is no wonder that the Epicureans 
contributed practically nothing to natural knowledge. They served a useful purpose by their protest 
against the increasing devotion of the later pagans to magic, astrology, and divination; but they 
remained, like their 


- 247 - 



founder, dogmatic, limited, and without genuine interest in anything outside individual 
happiness. They learnt by heart the creed of Epicurus, and added nothing to it throughout the 
centuries during which the school survived. 

The only eminent disciple of Epicurus is the poet Lucretius ( 99-55 B.C.), who was a 
contemporary of Julius Caesar. In the last days of the Roman Republic, free thought was the 
fashion, and the doctrines of Epicurus were popular among educated people. The Emperor 
Augustus introduced an archaistic revival of ancient virtue and ancient religion, which caused 
the poem of Lucretius On the Nature of Things to become unpopular, and it remained so until 
the Renaissance. Only one manuscript of it survived the Middle Ages, and that narrowly 
escaped destruction by bigots. Hardly any great poet has had to wait so long for recognition, but 
in modern times his merits have been almost universally acknowledged. For example, he and 
Benjamin Franklin were Shelley's favorite authors. 

His poem sets forth in verse the philosophy of Epicurus. Although the two men have the same 
doctrine, their temperaments are very different. Lucretius was passionate, and much more in 
need of exhortations to prudence than Epicurus was. He committed suicide, and appears to have 
suffered from periodic insanity— brought on, so some averred, by the pains of love or the 
unintended effects of a love philtre. He feels towards Epicurus as towards a saviour, and applies 
language of religious intensity to the man whom he regards as the destroyer of religion: 

When prostrate upon earth lay human life Visibly trampled down and foully crushed Beneath 
Religion's cruelty, who meanwhile Out of the regions of the heavens above Showed forth her 
face, lowering on mortal men With horrible aspect, first did a man of Greece Dare to lift up his 
mortal eyes against her; The first was he to stand up and defy her. Him neither stories of the 
gods, nor lightnings, Nor heaven with muttering menaces could quell, But all the more did they 
arouse his soul's Keen valour, till he longed to be the first 


* I quote the translation of Mr. R. C. Trevelyan, Bk. I, 60-79. 


- 248 - 


To break through the fast-bolted doors of Nature. Therefore his fervent energy of mind 
Prevailed, and he passed onward, voyaging far Beyond the flaming ramparts of the world, 
Ranging in mind and spirit far and wide Throughout the unmeasured universe; and thence A 
conqueror he returns to us, bringing back Knowledge both of what can and what cannot Rise 
into being, teaching us in fine Upon what principle each thing has its powers Limited, and its 
deep-set boundary stone. Therefore now has Religion been cast down Beneath men's feet, and 
trampled on in turn: Ourselves heaven-high his victory exalts. 

The hatred of religion expressed by Epicurus and Lucretius is not altogether easy to understand, 
if one accepts the conventional accounts of the cheerfulness of Greek religion and ritual. Keats 
Ode on a Grecian Urn, for instance, celebrates a religious ceremony, but not one which could 
fill men’s minds with dark and gloomy terrors. I think popular beliefs were very largely not of 
this cheerful kind. The worship of the Olympians had less of superstitious cruelty than the other 
forms of Greek religion, but even the Olympian gods had demanded occasional human sacrifice 
until the seventh or sixth century B.C., and this practice was recorded in myth and drama. * 
Throughout the barbarian world, human sacrifice was still recognized in the time of Epicurus; 
until the Roman conquest, it was practised in times of crisis, such as the Punic Wars, by even 
the most civilized of barbarian populations. 

As was shown most convincingly by Jane Harrison, the Greeks had, in addition to the official 
cults of Zeus and his family, other more primitive beliefs associated with more or less 
barbarous rites. These were to some extent incorporated in Orphism, which became the 
prevalent belief among men of religious temperament. It is sometimes supposed that Hell was a 
Christian invention, but this is a mistake. What Christianity did in this respect was only to 
systematize earlier popular beliefs. From the beginning of Plato Republic it is 


* Lucretius instances the sacrifice of Iphigenia as an example of the harm wrought by 
religion. Bk. I, 85-100. 


- 249 - 


clear that the fear of punishment after death was common in li fth century Athens, and it is not 
likely that it grew less in the interval between Socrates and Epicurus. (I am thinking not of the 
educated minority, but of the general population.) Certainly, also, it was common to attribute 
plagues, earthquakes, defeats in war, and such calamities, to divine displeasure or to failure to 
respect the omens. I think that Greek literature and art are probably very misleading as regards 
popular beliefs. What should we know of Methodism in the late eighteenth century if no record 
of the period survived except its aristocratic books and paintings? The influence of Methodism, 
like that of religiosity in the Hellenistic age, rose from below; it was already powerful in the 
time of Boswell and Sir Joshua Reynolds, although from their allusions to it the strength of its 
influence is not apparent. We must not, therefore, judge of popular religion in Greece by the 
pictures on "Grecian Urns" or by the works of poets and aristocratic philosophers. Epicurus was 
not aristocratic, either by birth or through his associates; perhaps this explains his exceptional 
hostility to religion. 

It is through the poem of Lucretius that the philosophy of Epicurus has chiefly become kn own 
to readers since the Renaissance. What has most impressed them, when they were not 
professional philosophers, is the contrast with Christian belief in such matters as materialism, 
denial of Providence, and rejection of immortality. What is especially striking to a modem 
reader is to have these views— which, now-a-days, are generally regarded as gloomy and 
depressing-presented as a gospel of liberation from the burden of fear. Lucretius is as firmly 
persuaded as any Christian of the importance of true belief in matters of religion. After 
describing how men seek escape from themselves when they are the victims of an inner 
conflict, and vainly seek relief in change of place, he says: 

Each man flies from his own self; Yet from that self in fact he has no power To escape: he 
clings to it in his own despite, And loathes it too, because, though he is sick, He perceives not 
the cause of his disease: Which if he could but comprehend aright, 


* Bk. Ill, 1068-76. 1 again quote Mr. R. C. Trevelyan’s translation. 


- 250 - 


Each would put all things else aside and first Study to learn the nature of the world, Since 'tis our 
state during eternal time, Not for one hour merely, that is in doubt, That state wherein mortals will 
have to pass The whole time that awaits them after death. 

The age of Epicurus was a weary age, and extinction could appear as a welcome rest from travail 
of spirit. The last age of the Republic, on the contrary, was not, to most Romans, a time of 
disillusionment: men of titanic energy were creating out of chaos a new order, which the 
Macedonians had failed to do. But to the Roman aristocrat who stood aside from politics, and 
cared nothing for the scramble for power and plunder, the course of events must have been 
profoundly discouraging. When to this was added the affliction of recurrent insanity, it is not to be 
wondered at that Lucretius accepted the hope of non-existence as a deliverance. 

But the fear of death is so deeply rooted in instinct that the gospel of Epicurus could not, at any 
time, make a wide popular appeal; it remained always the creed of a cultivated minority. Even 
among philosophers, after the time of Augustus, it was, as a rule, rejected in favour of Stoicism. It 
survived, it is true, though with diminishing vigour, for six hundred years after the death of 
Epicurus; but as men became increasingly oppressed by the miseries of our terrestrial existence, 
they demanded continually stronger medicine from philosophy or religion. The philosophers took 
refuge, with few exceptions, in Neoplatonism; the uneducated turned to various Eastern 
superstitions, and then, in continually increasing numbers, to Christianity, which, in its early fonn, 
placed all good in the life beyond the grave, thus offering men a gospel which was the exact 
opposite of that of Epicurus. Doctrines very similar to his, however, were revived by the French 
philosophies at the end of the eighteenth century, and brought to England by Bentham and his 
followers; this was done in conscious opposition to Christianity, which these men regarded as 
hostilely as Epicurus regarded the religions of his day. 


- 251 - 



CHAPTER XXVIII Stoicism 


STOICISM, while in origin contemporaneous with Epicureanism, had a longer history and less 
constancy in doctrine. The teaching of its founder Zeno, in the early part of the third century B.C., 
was by no means identical with that of Marcus Aurelius in the latter half of the second century 
A.D. Zeno was a materialist, whose doctrines were, in the main, a combination of Cynicism and 
Heraclitus; but gradually, through an admixture of Platonism, the Stoics abandoned materialism, 
until, in the end, little trace of it remained. Their ethical doctrine, it is true, changed very little, and 
was what most of them regarded as of the chief importance. Even in this respect, however, there is 
some change of emphasis. As time goes on, continually less is said about the other aspects of 
Stoicism, and continually more exclusive stress is laid upon ethics and those parts of theology that 
are most relevant to ethics. With regard to all the earlier Stoics, we are hampered by the fact that 
their works survive only in a few fragments. Seneca, Epictetus, and Marcus Aurelius, who belong 
to the first and second centuries A.D., alone survive in complete books. 

Stoicism is less Greek than any school of philosophy with which we have been hitherto 
concerned. The early Stoics were mostly Syrian, the later ones mostly Roman. Tarn ( Hellenistic 
Civilization, p. 287) suspects Chaldean influences in Stoicism. Ueberweg justly observes that, in 
Hellenizing the barbarian world, the Greeks dropped what only suited themselves. Stoicism, 
unlike the earlier purely Greek philosophies, is emotionally narrow, and in a certain sense 
fanatical; but it also contains religious elements of which the world felt the need, and which the 
Greeks seemed unable to supply. In particular, it appealed to rulers: "nearly all the successors of 
Alexander— we may say all the principal kings in existence in the generations following Zeno- 
professed themselves Stoics," says Professor Gilbert Murray. 

- 252 - 



Zeno was a Phoenician, bom at Citium, in Cyprus, at some, time during the latter half of the 
fourth century B.C. It seems probable that his family were engaged in commerce, and that 
business interests were what first took him to Athens. When there, however, he became anxious 
to study philosophy. The views of the Cynics were more congenial to him than those of any 
other school, but he was something of an eclectic. The followers of Plato accused him of 
plagiarizing the Academy. Socrates was the chief saint of the Stoics throughout their history; 
his attitude at the time of his trial, his refusal to escape, his calmness in the face of death, and 
his contention that the perpetrator of injustice injures himself more than his victim, all fitted in 
perfectly with Stoic teaching. So did his indifference to heat and cold, his plainness in matters 
of food and dress, and his complete independence of all bodily comforts. But the Stoics never 
took over Plato's doctrine of ideas, and most of them rejected his arguments for immortality. 
Only the later Stoics followed him in regarding the soul as immaterial; the earlier Stoics agreed 
with Heraclitus in the view that the soul is composed of material fire. Verbally, this doctrine is 
also to be found in Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius, but it seems that in them the fire is not to be 
taken literally as one of the four elements of which physical things are composed. 

Zeno had no patience with metaphysical subtleties. Virtue was what he thought important, and 
he only valued physics and metaphysics in so far as they contributed to virtue. He attempted to 
combat the metaphysical tendencies of the age by means of common sense, which, in Greece, 
meant materialism. Doubts as to the trustworthiness of the senses annoyed him, and he pushed 
the opposite doctrine to extremes. 

" Zeno began by asserting the existence of the real world. 'What do you mean by real?' asked the 
Sceptic. 'I mean solid and material. I mean that this table is solid matter."And God,' asked the 
Sceptic, 'and the Soul.' 'Perfectly solid,' said Zeno, 'more solid, if anything, than the table. "And 
virtue or justice or the Rule of Three; also solid matter?"Of course,' said Zeno, 'quite solid.’" 

It is evident that, at this point, Zeno, like many others, was hurried by anti-metaphysical zeal 
into a metaphysic of his own. 


* Gilbert Murray, The Stoic Philosophy ( 1915), p. 25. 


- 253 - 


The main doctrines to which the school remained constant throughout are concerned with cosmic 
determinism and human freedom. Zeno believed that there is no such thing as chance, and that the 
course of nature is rigidly determined by natural laws. Originally there was only fire; then the 
other elements— air, water, earth, in that order— gradually emerged. But sooner or later there will be 
a cosmic conflagration, and all will again become fire. This, according to most Stoics, is not a 
final consummation, like the end of the world in Christian doctrine, but only the conclusion of a 
cycle; the whole process will be repeated endlessly. Everything that happens has happened before, 
and will happen again, not once, but countless times. 

So far, the doctrine might seem cheerless, and in no respect more comforting than ordinary 
materialism such as that of Democritus. But this was only one aspect of it. The course of nature, in 
Stoicism as in eighteenth-century theology, was ordained by a Lawgiver who was also a 
beneficent Providence. Down to the smallest detail, the whole was designed to secure certain ends 
by natural means. These ends, except in so far as they concern gods and daemons, are to be found 
in the life of man. Everything has a purpose connected with human beings. Some animals are 
good to eat, some afford tests of courage; even bed bugs are useful, since they help us to wake in 
the morning and not lie in bed too long. The supreme Power is called sometimes God, sometimes 
Zeus. Seneca distinguished this Zeus from the object of popular belief, who was also real, but 
subordinate. 

God is not separate from the world; He is the soul of the world, and each of us contains a part of 
the Divine Fire. All things are parts of one single system, which is called Nature; the individual 
life is good when it is in harmony with Nature. In one sense, every life is in harmony with Nature, 
since it is such as Nature's laws have caused it to be; but in another sense a human life is only in 
hannony with Nature when the individual will is directed to ends which are among those of 
Nature. Virtue consists in a will which is in agreement with Nature. The wicked, though perforce 
they obey God's law, do so involuntarily; in the simile of Cleanthes, they are like a dog tied to a 
cart, and compelled to go wherever it goes. 

In the life of an individual man, virtue is the sole good; such things as health, happiness, 
possessions, are of no account. Since virtue resides in the will, everything really good or bad in a 
man's life depends only 


- 254 - 



upon himself. He may become poor, but what of it? He can still be virtuous. A tyrant may put him 
in prison, but he can still persevere in living in hannony with Nature. He may be sentenced to 
death, but he can die nobly, like Socrates. Other men have power only over externals; virtue, 
which alone is truly good, rests entirely with the individual. Therefore every man has perfect 
freedom, provided he emancipates himself from mundane desires. It is only through false 
judgements that such desires prevail; the sage whose judgements are true is master of his fate in 
all that he values, since no outside force can deprive him of virtue. 

There are obvious logical difficulties about this doctrine. If virtue is really the sole good, a 
beneficent Providence must be solely concerned to cause virtue, yet the laws of Nature have 
produced abundance of sinners. If virtue is the sole good, there can be no reason against cruelty 
and injustice, since, as the Stoics are never tired of pointing out, cruelty and injustice afford the 
sufferer the best opportunities for the exercise of virtue. If the world is completely deterministic, 
natural laws will decide whether I shall be virtuous or not. If I am wicked, Nature compels me to 
be wicked, and the freedom which virtue is supposed to give is not possible for me. 

To a modern mind, it is difficult to feel enthusiastic about a virtuous life if nothing is going to be 
achieved by it. We admire a medical man who risks his fife in an epidemic of plague, because we 
think illness is an evil, and we hope to diminish its frequency. But if illness is no evil, the medical 
man might as well stay comfortably at home. To the Stoic, his virtue is an end in itself, not 
something that does good. And when we take a longer view, what is the ultimate outcome? A 
destruction of the present world by fire, and then a repetition of the whole process. Could anything 
be more devastatingly futile? There may be progress here and there, for a time, but in the long run 
there is only recurrence. When we see something unbearably painful, we hope that in time such 
things will cease to happen; but the Stoic assures us that what is happening now will happen over 
and over again. Providence, which sees the whole, must, one would think, ultimately grow weary 
through despair. 

There goes with this a certain coldness in the Stoic conception of virtue. Not only bad passions are 
condemned, but all passions. The sage does not feel sympathy: when his wife or his children die, 
he 


- 255 - 



reflects that this event is no obstacle to his own virtue, and therefore he does not suffer deeply. 
Friendship, so highly prized by Epicurus, is all very well, but it must not be carried to the point 
where your friend's misfortunes can destroy your holy calm. As for public life, it may be your 
duty to engage in it, since it gives opportunities for justice, fortitude, and so on; but you must 
not be actuated by a desire to benefit mankind, since the benefits you can confer— such as peace, 
or a more adequate supply of food— are no true benefits, and, in any case, nothing matters to you 
except your own virtue. The Stoic is not virtuous in order to do good, but does good in order to 
be virtuous. It has not occurred to him to love his neighbour as himself; love, except in a 
superficial sense, is absent from his conception of virtue. 

When I say this, I am thinking of love as an emotion, not as a principle. As a principle, the 
Stoics preached universal love; this principle is found in Seneca and his successors, and 
probably was taken by them from earlier Stoics. The logic of the school led to doctrines which 
were softened by the humanity of its adherents, who were much better men than they would 
have been if they had been consistent. Kant— who resembles them— says that you must be kind 
to your brother, not because you are fond of him, but because the moral law enjoins kindness; I 
doubt, however, whether, in private life, he lived down to this precept. 

Leaving these generalities, let us come to the history of Stoicism. 

Of Zeno, jyonly some fragments remain. From these it appears that he defined God as the fiery 
mind of the world, that he said God was a bodily substance, and that the whole universe formed 
the substance of God; Tertullian says that, according to Zeno, God runs through the material 
world as honey runs through the honeycomb. According to Diogenes Laertius, Zeno held that 
the General Law, which is Right Reason, pervading everything, is the same as Zeus, the 
Supreme Head of the government of the universe: God, Mind, Destiny, Zeus, are one thing. 
Destiny is a power which moves matter; "Providence" and "Nature" are other names for it. Zeno 
does not believe that there should be temples to the gods: "To build temples there will be no 
need: for a temple must not be held a thing of great worth or anything holy. Nothing can be of 
great worth or holy which 


* For the sources of what follows, see Bevan, Later Greek Religion, p. 1 ff. 


- 256 - 


is the work of builders and mechanics." He seems, like the later Stoics, to have believed in 
astrology and divination. Cicero says that he attributed a divine potency to the stars. Diogenes 
Laertius says: "All kinds of divination the Stoics leave valid. There must be divination, they say, if 
there is such a thing as Providence. They prove the reality of the art of divination by a number of 
cases in which predictions have come true, as Zeno asserts. "Chrysippus is explicit on this subject. 

The Stoic doctrine as to virtue does not appear in the surviving fragments of Zeno, but seems to 
have been held by him. 

Cleanthes of Assos, the immediate successor of Zeno, is chiefly notable for two things. First: as 
we have already seen, he held that Aristarchus of Samos should be prosecuted for impiety because 
he made the sun, instead of the earth, the centre of the universe. The second thing is his Hymn to 
Zeus, much of which might have been written by Pope, or any educated Christian in the century 
after Newton. Even more Christian is the short prayer of Cleanthes: 

Lead me, O Zeus, and thou, O Destiny, Lead thou me on. To whatsoever task thou sendest me, 
Lead thou me on. I follow fearless, or, if in mistrust I lag and will not, follow still I must. 

Chrysippus ( 280-207 B.C.), who succeeded Cleanthes, was a voluminous author, and is said to 
have written seven hundred and five books. He made Stoicism systematic and pedantic. He held 
that only Zeus, the Supreme Fire, is immortal; the other gods, including the sun and moon, are 
born and die. He is said to have considered that God has no share in the causation of evil, but it is 
not clear how he reconciled this with detenninism. Elsewhere he deals with evil after the manner 
of Heraclitus, maintaining that opposites imply one another, and good without evil is logically 
impossible: "There can be nothing more inept than the people who suppose that good could have 
existed without the existence of evil. Good and evil being antithetical, both must needs subsist in 
opposition." In support of this doctrine he appeals to Plato, not to Heraclitus. 

Chrysippus maintained that the good man is always happy and the 


- 257 - 



bad man unhappy, and that the good man's happiness differs in no way from God’s. On the 
question whether the soul survives death, there were conflicting opinions. Cleanthes maintained 
that all souls survive until the next universal conflagration (when everything is absorbed into 
God); but Chrysippus maintained that this is only true of the souls of the wise. He was less 
exclusively ethical in his interests than the later Stoics; in fact, he made logic fundamental. The 
hypothetical and disjunctive syllogism, as well as the word "disjunction," are due to the Stoics; 
so is the study of grammar and the invention of "cases" in declension. jyChrysippus, or other 
Stoics inspired by his work, had an elaborate theory of knowledge, in the main empirical and 
based on perception, though they allowed certain ideas and principles, which were held to be 
established by consensus gentium, the agreement of mankind. But Zeno, as well as the Roman 
Stoics, regarded all theoretical studies as subordinate to ethics: he says that philosophy is like 
an orchard, in which logic is the walls, physics the trees, and ethics the fruit; or like an egg, in 
which logic is the shell, physics the white, and ethics the yolk.a€ Chrysippus, it would seem, 
allowed more independent value to theoretical studies. Perhaps his influence accounts for the 
fact that among the Stoics there were many men who made advances in mathematics and other 
sciences. 

Stoicism, after Chrysippus, was considerably modified by two important men, Panaetius and 
Posidonius. Panaetius introduced a considerable element of Platonism, and abandoned 
materialism. He was a friend of the younger Scipio, and had an influence on Cicero, through 
whom, mainly, Stoicism became kn own to the Romans. Posidonius, under whom Cicero 
studied in Rhodes, influenced him even more. Posidonius was taught by Panaetius, who died 
about 1 10 B.C. 

Posidonius ( ca . 135 -ca. 51 B.C.) was a Syrian Greek, and was a child when the Seleucid empire 
came to an end. Perhaps it was his experience of anarchy in Syria that caused him to travel 
westward, first to Athens, where he imbibed the Stoic philosophy, and then further afield, to the 
western parts of the Roman Empire. "He saw with his own eyes the sunset in the Atlantic 
beyond the verge of the 


* See Barth, Die Stoa, 4th edition, Sturtgart, 1922. a€ lb. 


- 258 - 


known world, and the African coast over against Spain, where the trees were full of apes, and 
the villages of barbarous people inland from Marseilles, where human heads hanging at the 
house-doors for trophies were an every-day sight." ^_He became a voluminous writer on 
scientific subjects; indeed, one of the reasons for his travels was a wish to study the tides, which 
could not be done in the Mediterranean. He did excellent work in astronomy; as we saw in 

Chapter XXII his estimate of the distance of the sun was the best in antiquity. ^fi-He was also a 
historian of note— he continued Polybius. But it was chiefly as an eclectic philosopher that he 
was known: he combined with Stoicism much of Plato's teaching, which the Academy, in its 
sceptical phase, appeared to have forgotten. 

This affinity to Plato is shown in his teaching about the soul and the life after death. Panaetius 
had said, as most Stoics did, that the soul perishes with the body. Posidonius, on the contrary, 
says that it continues to live in the air, where, in most cases, it remains unchanged until the next 
world-conflagration. There is no hell, but the wicked, after death, are not so fortunate as the 
good, for sin makes the vapours of the soul muddy, and prevents it from rising as far as the 
good soul rises. The very wicked stay near the earth and are reincarnated; the truly virtuous rise 
to the stellar sphere and spend their time watching the stars go round. They can help other 
souls; this explains (he thinks) the truth of astrology. Bevan suggests that, by this revival of 
Orphic notions and incorporation of Neo-Pythagorean beliefs, Posidonius may have paved the 
way for Gnosticism. He adds, very truly, that what was fatal to such philosophies as his was not 
Christianity but the Copemican theory. a€j Cleanthes was right in regarding Aristarchus of 
Samos as a dangerous enemy. 

Much more important historically (though not philosophically) than the earlier Stoics were the 
three who were connected with Rome: Seneca, Epictetus, and Marcus Aurelius— a minister, a 
slave, and an emperor, respectively. 


* Bevan, Stoics and Sceptics, p. 88. 

a He estimated that by sailing westward from Cadiz, India could be reached after 70,000 
g stades. "This remark was the ultimate foundation of Columbus's confidence." Tarn, 
Hellenistic Civilization , p. 249. 

a 

q The above account of Posidonius is mainly based on Chapter III of Edwyn Bevan Stoics 
and Sceptics. 
i 


- 259 - 


Seneca ( ca . 3 B.C. to A.D. 65) was a Spaniard, whose father was a cultivated man living in Rome. 
Seneca adopted a political career, and was being moderately successful when he was banished to 
Corsica ( A.D. 41) by the Emperor Claudius, because he had incurred the enmity of the Empress 
Messalina. Claudius's second wife Agrippina recalled Seneca from exile in A.D. 48, and 
appointed him tutor to her son, aged eleven. Seneca was less fortunate than Aristotle in his pupil, 
who was the Emperor Nero. Although, as a Stoic, Seneca officially despised riches, he amassed a 
huge fortune, amounting, it was said, to three hundred million sesterces (about twelve million 
dollars). Much of this he acquired by lending money in Britain; according to Dio, the excessive 
rates of interest that he exacted were among the causes of revolt in that country. The heroic Queen 
Boadicea, if this is true, was heading a rebellion against capitalism as represented by the 
philosophic apostle of austerity. 

Gradually, as Nero's excesses grew more unbridled, Seneca fell increasingly out of favour. At 
length he was accused, justly or unjustly, of complicity in a wide-spread conspiracy to murder 
Nero and place a new emperor— some said, Seneca himself— upon the throne. In view of his former 
services, he was graciously permitted to commit suicide. ( A.D. 65). 

His end was edifying. At first, on being informed of the Emperor’s decision, he set about making a 
will. When told that there was no time allowed for such a lengthy business, he turned to his 
sorrowing family and said: "Never mind, I leave you what is of far more value than earthly riches, 
the example of a virtuous life"— or words to that effect. He then opened his veins, and summoned 
his secretaries to take down his dying words; according to Tacitus, his eloquence continued to 
flow during his last moments. His nephew Lucan, the poet, suffered a similar death at the same 
time, and expired reciting his own verses. Seneca was judged, in future ages, rather by his 
admirable precepts than by his somewhat dubious practice. Several of the Fathers claimed him as 
a Christian, and a supposed correspondence between him and Saint Paul was accepted as genuine 
by such men as Saint Jerome. 

Epictetus (bom about A.D. 60, died about A.D. 100) is a very different type of man, though 
closely akin as a philosopher. He was a Greek, originally a slave of Epaphroditus, a freedman of 
Nero and 


- 260 - 



then his minister. He was lame— as a result, it was said, of a cruel punishment in his days of 
slavery. He lived and taught at Rome until A.D. 90, when the Emperor Domitian, who had no use 
for intellectuals, banished all philosophers. Epictetus thereupon retired to Nicopolis in Epirus, 
where, after some years spent in writing and teaching, he died. 

Marcus Aurelius ( A.D. 121-180) was at the other end of the social scale. He was the adopted son 
of the good Emperor Antoninus Pius, who was his uncle and his father-in-law, whom he 
succeeded in A.D. 161, and whose memory he revered. As Emperor, he devoted himself to Stoic 
virtue. He had much need of fortitude, for his reign was beset by calamities— earthquakes, 
pestilences, long and difficult wars, military insurrections. His Meditations, which are addressed 
to himself, and apparently not intended for publication, show that he felt his public duties 
burdensome, and that he suffered from a great weariness. His only son Commodus, who 
succeeded him, turned out to be one of the worst of the many bad emperors, but successfully 
concealed his vicious propensities so long as his father lived. The philosopher's wife Faustina was 
accused, perhaps unjustly, of gross immorality, but he never suspected her, and after her death 
took trouble about her deification. He persecuted the Christians, because they rejected the State 
religion, which he considered politically necessary. In all his actions he was conscientious, but in 
most he was unsuccessful. He is a pathetic figure: in a list of mundane desires to be resisted, the 
one that he finds most seductive is the wish to retire to a quiet country life. For this, the 
opportunity never came. Some of his Meditations are dated from the camp, on distant campaigns, 
the hardships of which eventually caused his death. 

It is remarkable that Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius are completely at one on all philosophical 
questions. This suggests that, although social circumstances affect the philosophy of an age, 
individual circumstances have less influence than is sometimes thought upon the philosophy of an 
individual. Philosophers are usually men with a certain breadth of mind, who can largely discount 
the accidents of their private lives; but even they cannot rise above the larger good or evil of their 
time. In bad times they invent consolations; in good times their interests are more purely 
intellectual. 

Gibbon, whose detailed history begins with the vices of Commodus, 


- 261 - 



agrees with most eighteenth-century writers in regarding the period of the Antonines as a 
golden age. "If a man were called upon," he says, "to fix the period in the history of the world, 
during which the condition of the human race was most happy and prosperous, he would, 
without hesitation, name that which elapsed from the death of Domitian to the accession of 
Commodus." It is impossible to agree altogether with this judgement. The evil of slavery 
involved immense suffering, and was sapping the vigour of the ancient world. There were 
gladiatorial shows and fights with wild beasts, which were intolerably cruel and must have 
debased the populations that enjoyed the spectacle. Marcus Aurelius, it is true, decreed that 
gladiators should fight with blunted swords; but this reform was shortlived, and he did nothing 
about fights with wild beasts. The economic system was very bad; Italy was going out of 
cultivation, and the population of Rome depended upon the free distribution of grain from the 
provinces. All initiative was concentrated in the Emperor and his ministers; throughout the vast 
extent of the Empire, no one, except an occasional rebellious general, could do anything but 
submit. Men looked to the past for what was best; the future, they felt, would be at best a 
weariness, and at worst a horror. When we compare the tone of Marcus Aurelius with that of 
Bacon, or Locke, or Condorcet, we see the difference between a tired and a hopeful age. In a 
hopeful age, great present evils can be endured, because it is thought that they will pass; but in a 
tired age even real goods lose their savour. The Stoic ethic suited the times of Epictetus and 
Marcus Aurelius, because its gospel was one of endurance rather than hope. 

Undoubtedly the age of the Antonines was much better than any later age until the Renaissance, 
from the point of view of the general happiness. But careful study shows that it was not so 
prosperous as its architectural remains would lead one to suppose. Graeco-Roman civilization 
had made very little impression on the agricultural regions; it was practically limited to the 
cities. Even in the cities, there was a proletariat which suffered very great poverty, and there 
was a large slave class. Rostovtseff sums up a discussion of social and economic conditions in 
the cities as follows: * 


* Rostovtseff, The Social and Economic History of the Roman Empire , p. 179. 


- 262 - 


"The picture of their social conditions is not so attractive as the picture of their external 
appearance. The impression conveyed by our sources is that the splendour of the cities was 
created by, and existed for, a rather small minority of their population; that the welfare even of 
this small minority was based on comparatively weak foundations; that the large masses of the 
city population had either a very moderate income or lived in extreme poverty. In a word, we 
must not exaggerate the wealth of the cities: their external aspect is misleading." 

On earth, says Epictetus, we are prisoners, and in an earthly body. According to Marcus 
Aurelius, he used to say "Thou art a little soul bearing about a corpse." Zeus could not make the 
body free, but he gave us a portion of his divinity. God is the father of men, and we are all 
brothers. We should not say "I am an Athenian" or "I am a Roman," but "I am a citizen of the 
universe." If you were a kinsman of Caesar, you would feel safe; how much more should you 
feel safe in being a kinsman of God? If we understand that virtue is the only true good, we shall 
see that no real evil can befall us. 

I must die. But must I die groaning? I must be imprisoned. But must I whine as well? I must 
suffer exile. Can any one then hinder me from going with a smile, and a good courage, and at 
peace? "Tell the secret." I refuse to tell, for this is in my power. "But I will chain you." What 
say you, fellow? Chain me? My leg you will chain— yes, but my will— no, not even Zeus can 
conquer that. "I will imprison you." My bit of a body, you mean. "I will behead you." Why? 
When did I ever tell you that I was the only man in the world that could not be beheaded? 

These are the thoughts that those who pursue philosophy should ponder, these are the lessons 
they should write down day by day, in these they should exercise themselves. 

Slaves are the equals of other men, because all alike are sons of God. We must submit to God 
as a good citizen submits to the law. "The soldier swears to respect no man above Caesar, but 

we to respect ourselves first of all." ^IL'When you appear before the mighty of the earth, 
remember that Another looks from above on what is happening, and that you must please Him 
rather than this man." a€j 


* Quoted from Oates, op. cit., pp. 225-26. 
^ lb., p. 251. 
a 

€ lb., p. 280. 
i 


- 263 - 


Who then is a Stoic? 


Show me a man moulded to the pattern of the judgments that he utters, in the same way as we call 
a statue Phidian that is moulded according to the art of Phidias. Show me one who is sick and yet 
happy, in peril and yet happy, dying and yet happy, in exile and happy, in disgrace and happy. 
Show him me. By the gods I would fain see a Stoic. Nay you cannot show me a finished Stoic; 
then show me one in the moulding, one who has set his feet on the path. Do me this kindness, do 
not grudge an old man like me a sight I never saw till now. What! You think you are going to 
show me the Zeus of Phidias or his Athena, that work of ivory and gold? It is a soul I want; let one 
of you show me the soul of a man who wishes to be at one with God, and to blame God or man no 
longer, to fail in nothing, to feel no misfortune, to be free from anger, envy, and jealousy-one 
who (why wrap up my meaning?) desires to change his manhood for godhead, and who in this 
poor body of his has his purpose set upon communion with God. Show him to me. Nay, you 
cannot. 

Epictetus is never weary of showing how we should deal with what are considered misfortunes, 
which he does often by means of homely dialogues. 

Like the Christians, he holds that we should love our enemies. In general, in common with other 
Stoics, he despises pleasure, but there is a kind of happiness that is not to be despised. "Athens is 
beautiful. Yes, but happiness is far more beautiful— freedom from passion and disturbance, the 
sense that your affairs depend on no one" (p. 428). Every man is an actor in a play, in which God 
has assigned the parts; it is our duty to perfonn our part worthily, whatever it may be. 

There is great sincerity and simplicity in the writings which record the teaching of Epictetus. 

(They are written down from notes by his pupil Arrian.) His morality is lofty and unworldly; in a 
situation in which a man’s main duty is to resist tyrannical power, it would be difficult to find 
anything more helpful. In some respects, for instance in recognizing the brotherhood of man and 
in teaching the equality of slaves, it is superior to anything to be found in Plato or Aristotle or any 
philosopher whose thought is inspired by the City State. The actual world, in the time of 
Epictetus, was very inferior to the Athens of Pericles; but the evil in what existed liberated his 


- 264 - 



aspirations, and his ideal world is as superior to that of Plato as his actual world is inferior to the 
Athens of the fifth century. 

The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius begin by acknowledging his indebtedness to his grandfather, 
father, adopted father, various teachers, and the gods. Some of the obligations he enumerates are 
curious. He learned (he says) from Diognetus not to listen to miracle-workers; from Rusticus, not 
to write poetry; from Sextus, to practise gravity without affectation; from Alexander the 
grammarian, not to correct bad grammar in others, but to use the right expression shortly 
afterwards; from Alexander the Platonist, not to excuse tardiness in answering a letter by the plea 
of press of business; from his adopted father, not to fall in love with boys. He owes it to the gods 
(he continues) that he was not brought up too long with his grandfather's concubine, and did not 
make proof of his virility too soon; that his children are neither stupid nor defonned in body; that 
his wife is obedient, affectionate, and simple; and that when he took to philosophy he did not 
waste time on history, syllogism, or astronomy. 

What is impersonal in the Meditations agrees closely with Epictetus. Marcus Aurelius is doubtful 
about immortality, but says, as a Christian might: "Since it is possible that thou mayst depart from 
life this very moment, regulate every act and thought accordingly." Life in hannony with the 
universe is what is good; and harmony with the universe is the same thing as obedience to the will 
of God. 

"Everything harmoni z es with me which is hannonious to thee, O Universe. Nothing for me is too 
early or too late, which is in due time for thee. Everything is fruit to me which thy seasons bring, 

O Nature: from thee are all things, in thee are all things, to thee all things return. The poet says, 
Dear city of Cecrops; and wilt not thou say, Dear city of Zeus?" 

One sees that Saint Augustine's City of God was in part taken over from the pagan Emperor. 

Marcus Aurelius is persuaded that God gives every man a special daemon as his guide— a belief 
which reappears in the Christian guardian angel. He finds comfort in the thought of the universe 
as a closely-knit whole; it is, he says, one living being, having one substance and one soul. One of 
his maxims is: "Frequently consider the connection of all things in the universe." "Whatever may 
happen to thee, it was prepared for thee from all eternity; and the implication 


- 265 - 



of causes was from eternity spinning the thread of thy being." There goes with this, in spite of his 
position in the Roman State, the Stoic belief in the human race as one community: "My city and 
country, so far as I am Antoninus, is Rome, but so far as I am a man, it is the world." There is the 
difficulty that one finds in all Stoics, of reconciling determinism with the freedom of the will. 
"Men exist for the sake of one another," he says, when he is thinking of his duty as ruler. "The 
wickedness of one man does no harm to another," he says on the same page, when he is thinking 
of the doctrine that the virtuous will alone is good. He never inferred that the goodness of one man 
does no good to another, and that he would do no harm to anybody but himself if he were as bad 
an Emperor as Nero; and yet this conclusion seems to follow. 

"It is peculiar to man," he says, "to love even those who do wrong. And this happens if, when they 
do wrong, it occurs to thee that they are kinsmen, and that they do wrong through ignorance and 
unintentionally, and that soon both of you will die; and above all, that the wrong-doer has done 
thee no hann, for he has not made thy ruling faculty worse than it was before." 

And again: "Love mankind. Follow God. . . . And it is enough to remember that Law rules all." 

These passages bring out very clearly the inherent contradictions in Stoic ethics and theology. On 
the one hand, the universe is a rigidly deterministic single whole, in which all that happens is the 
result of previous causes. On the other hand, the individual will is completely autonomous, and no 
man can be forced to sin by outside causes. This is one contradiction, and there is a second closely 
connected with it. Since the will is autonomous, and the virtuous will alone is good, one man 
cannot do either good or harm to another; therefore benevolence is an illusion. Something must be 
said about each of these contradictions. 

The contradiction between free will and determinism is one of those that run through philosophy 
from early times to our own day, taking different forms at different times. At present it is the Stoic 
form that concerns us. 

I think that a Stoic, if we could make him submit to a Socratic interrogation, would defend his 
view more or less as follows: The universe is a single animate Being, having a soul which may 
also be 


- 266 - 



called God or Reason. As a whole, this Being is free. God decided, from the first, that He would 
act according to fixed general laws, but He chose such laws as would have the best results. 
Sometimes, in particular cases, the results are not wholly desirable, but this inconvenience is 
worth enduring, as in human codes of law, for the sake of the advantage of legislative fixity. A 
human being is partly fire, partly of lower clay; in so far as he is fire (at any rate when it is of the 
best quality), he is part of God. When the divine part of a man exercises will virtuously, this will 
is part of God’s, which is free; therefore in these circumstances the human will also is free. 

This is a good answer, up to a point, but it breaks down when we consider the causes of our 
volitions. We all know, as a matter of empirical fact, that dyspepsia, for example, has a bad effect 
on a man's virtue, and that, by suitable drugs forcibly administered, willpower can be destroyed. 
Take Epictetus's favorite case, the man unjustly imprisoned by a tyrant, of which there have been 
more examples in recent years than at any other period in human history. Some of these men have 
acted with Stoic heroism; some, rather mysteriously, have not. It has become clear, not only that 
sufficient torture will break down almost any man’s fortitude, but also that morphia or cocaine can 
reduce a man to docility. The will, in fact, is only independent of the tyrant so long as the tyrant is 
unscientific. This is an extreme example; but the same arguments that exist in favour of 
determinism in the inanimate world exist also in the sphere of human volitions in general. I do not 
say— I do not think— that these arguments are conclusive; I say only that they are of equal strength 
in both cases, and that there can be no good reason for accepting them in one region and rejecting 
them in another. The Stoic, when he is engaged in urging a tolerant attitude to sinners, will 
himself urge that the sinful will is a result of previous causes; it is only the virtuous will that 
seems to him free. This, however, is inconsistent. Marcus Aurelius explains his own virtue as due 
to the good influence of parents, grandparents, and teachers; the good will is just as much a result 
of previous causes as the bad will. The Stoic may say truly that his philosophy is a cause of virtue 
in those who adopt it, but it seem that it will not have this desirable effect unless there is a certain 
admixture of intellectual error. The realization that virtue and sin alike are the 


- 267 - 



inevitable result of previous causes (as the Stoics should have held) is likely to have a somewhat 
paralysing effect on moral effort. 

I come now to the second contradiction, that the Stoic, while he preached benevolence, held, in 
theory, that no man can do either good or harm to another, since the virtuous will alone is good, 
and the virtuous will is independent of outside causes. This contradiction is more patent than the 
other, and more peculiar to the Stoics (including certain Christian moralists). The explanation of 
their not noticing it is that, like many other people, they had two systems of ethics, a superfine one 
for themselves, and an inferior one for "the lesser breeds without the law." When the Stoic 
philosopher is thinking of himself, he holds that happiness and all other worldly so-called goods 
are worthless; he even says that to desire happiness is contrary to nature, meaning that it involves 
lack of resignation to the will of God. But as a practical man administering the Roman Empire, 
Marcus Aurelius knows perfectly well that this sort of thing won’t do. It is his duty to see that the 
grain-ships from Africa duly reach Rome, that measures are taken to relieve the sufferings caused 
by pestilence, and that barbarian enemies are not allowed to cross the frontier. That is to say, in 
dealing with those of his subjects whom he does not regard as Stoic philosophers, actual or 
potential, he accepts ordinary mundane standards of what is good or bad. It is by applying these 
standards that he arrives at his duty as an administrator. What is odd is that this duty, itself, is in 
the higher sphere of what the Stoic sage should do, although it is deduced from an ethic which the 
Stoic sage regards as fundamentally mistaken. 

The only reply that I can imagine to this difficulty is one which is perhaps logically unassailable, 
but is not very plausible. It would, I think, be given by Kant, whose ethical system is very similar 
to that of the Stoics. True, he might say, there is nothing good but the good will, but the will is 
good when it is directed to certain ends, that, in themselves, are indifferent. It does not matter 
whether Mr. A is happy or unhappy, but I, if I am virtuous, shall act in a way which I believe will 
make him happy, because that is what the moral law enjoins. I cannot make Mr. A virtuous, 
because his virtue depends only upon himself; but I can do something towards making him happy, 
or rich, or learned, or healthy. The Stoic ethic may therefore be stated as follows: Certain things 
are vulgarly considered goods, 


- 268 - 



but this is a mistake; what is good is a will directed towards securing these false goods for other 
people. This doctrine involves no logical contradiction, but it loses all plausibility if we 
genuinely believe that what are commonly considered goods are worthless, for in that case the 
virtuous will might just as well be directed to quite other ends. 

There is, in fact, an element of sour grapes in Stoicism. We can't be happy, but we can be good; 
let us therefore pretend that, so long as we are good, it doesn't matter being unhappy. This 
doctrine is heroic, and, in a bad world, useful; but it is neither quite true nor, in a fundamental 
sense, quite sincere. 

Although the main importance of the Stoics was ethical, there were two respects in which their 
teaching bore fruit in other fields. One of these is theory of knowledge; the other is the doctrine 
of natural law and natural rights. 

In theory of knowledge, in spite of Plato, they accepted perception; the deceptiveness of the 
senses, they held, was really false judgement, and could be avoided by a little care. A Stoic 
philosopher, Sphaerus, an immediate disciple of Zeno, was once invited to dinner by King 
Ptolemy, who, having heard of this doctrine, offered him a pomegranate made of wax. The 
philosopher proceeded to try to eat it, whereupon the king laughed at him. He replied that he 
had felt no certainty of its being a real pomegranate, but had thought it unlikely that anything 
inedible would be supplied at the royal table. jMn this answer he appealed to a Stoic distinction, 
between those things which can be kn own with certainty on the basis of perception, and those 
which, on this basis, are only probable. On the whole, this doctrine was sane and scientific. 

Another doctrine of theirs in theory of knowledge was more influential, though more 
questionable. This was their belief in innate ideas and principles. Greek logic was wholly 
deductive, and this raised the question of first premisses. First premisses had to be, at least in 
part, general, and no method existed of proving them. The Stoics held that there are certain 
principles which are luminously obvious, and are admitted by all men; these could be made, as 
in Euclid Elements, the basis of deduction. Innate ideas, similarly, could be used as the starting- 
point of definitions. This point of view was accepted throughout the Middle Ages, and even by 
Descartes. 


* Diogenes Laertius, Vol. VII, p. 177. 


- 269 - 


The doctrine of natural right, as it appears in the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries, 
is a revival of a Stoic doctrine, though with important modifications. It was the Stoics who 
distinguished jus naturale from jus gentium. Natural law was derived from first principles of the 
kind held to underlie all general knowledge. By nature, the Stoics held, all human beings are 
equal. Marcus Aurelius, in his Meditations, favours "a polity in which there is the same law for 
all, a polity administered with regard to equal rights and equal freedom of speech, and a kingly 
government which respects most of all the freedom of the governed." This was an ideal which 
could not be consistently realized in the Roman Empire, but it influenced legislation, particularly 
in improving the status of women and slaves. Christianity took over this part of Stoic teaching 
along with much of the rest. And when at last, in the seventeenth century, the opportunity came to 
combat despotism effectually, the Stoic doctrines of natural law and natural equality, in their 
Christian dress, acquired a practical force which, in antiquity, not even an emperor could give to 
them. 


CHAPTER XXIX The Roman Empire in Relation to Culture 

T HE Roman Empire affected the history of culture in various more or less separate ways. 

First: there is the direct effect of Rome on Hellenistic thought. This is not very important or 
profound. 

Second: the effect of Greece and the East on the western half of the empire. This was profound 
and lasting, since it included the Christian religion. 

Third: the importance of the long Roman peace in diffusing culture 

- 270 - 



and in accustoming men to the idea of a single civilization associated with a single government. 

Fourth: the transmission of Hellenistic civilization to the Mohammedans, and thence ultimately to 
western Europe. 

Before considering these influences of Rome, a very brief synopsis of the political history will be 
useful. 

Alexander’s conquests had left the western Mediterranean untouched; it was dominated, at the 
beginning of the third century B.C., by two powerful City States, Carthage and Syracuse. In the 
first and second Punic Wars ( 264-241 and 218-201), Rome conquered Syracuse and reduced 
Carthage to insignificance. During the second century, Rome conquered the Macedonian 
monarchies— Egypt, it is true, lingered on as a vassal state until the death of Cleopatra ( 30 B.C.). 
Spain was conquered as an incident in the war with Hannibal; France was conquered by Caesar in 
the middle of the first century B.C., and England was conquered about a hundred years later. The 
frontiers of the Empire, in its great days, were the Rhine and Danube in Europe, the Euphrates in 
Asia, and the desert in North Africa. 

Roman imperialism was, perhaps, at its best in North Africa (important in Christian history as the 
home of Saint Cyprian and Saint Augustine), where large areas, uncultivated before and after 
Roman times, were rendered fertile and supported populous cities. The Roman Empire was on the 
whole stable and peaceful for over two hundred years, from the accession of Augustus ( 30 B.C.) 
until the disasters of the third century. 

Meanwhile the constitution of the Roman State had undergone important developments. 
Originally, Rome was a small City State, not very unlike those of Greece, especially such as, like 
Sparta, did not depend upon foreign commerce. Kings, like those of Homeric Greece, had been 
succeeded by an aristocratic republic. Gradually, while the aristocratic element, embodied in the 
Senate, remained powerful, democratic elements were added; the resulting compromise was 
regarded by Panaetius the Stoic (whose views are reproduced by Polybius and Cicero) as an ideal 
combination of monarchical, aristocratic, and democratic elements. But conquest upset the 
precarious balance; it brought immense new wealth to the senatorial class, and, in a slightly lesser 
degree, to the "knights," as the upper middle class were called. Italian agriculture, which had been 
in the 


- 271 - 



hands of small farmers growing grain by their own labour and that of their families, came to be a 
matter of huge estates belonging to the Roman aristocracy, where vines and olives were cultivated 
by slave labour. The result was the virtual omnipotence of the Senate, which was used 
shamelessly for the enrichment of individuals, without regard for the interests of the State or the 
welfare of its subjects. 

A democratic movement, inaugurated by the Gracchi in the latter half of the second century B.C., 
led to a series of civil wars, and finally —as so often in Greece— to the establishment of a 
"tyranny." It is curious to see the repetition, on such a vast scale, of developments which, in 
Greece, had been confined to minute areas. Augustus, the heir and adopted son of Julius Caesar, 
who reigned from 30 B.C. to A.D. 14, put an end to civil strife, and (with few exceptions) to 
external wars of conquest. For the first time since the beginnings of Greek civilization, the ancient 
world enjoyed peace and security. 

Two things had ruined the Greek political system: first, the claim of each city to absolute 
sovereignty; second, the bitter and bloody strife between rich and poor within most cities. After 
the conquest of Carthage and the Hellenistic kingdoms, the first of these causes no longer afflicted 
the world, since no effective resistance to Rome was possible. But the second cause remained. In 
the civil wars, one general would proclaim himself the champion of the Senate, the other of the 
people. Victory went to the one who offered the highest rewards to the soldiers. The soldiers 
wanted not only pay and plunder, but grants of land; therefore each civil war ended in the formally 
legal expulsion of many existing landholders, who were nominally tenants of the State, to make 
room for the legionaries of the victor. The expenses of the war, while in progress, were defrayed 
by executing rich men and confiscating their property. This system, disastrous as it was, could not 
easily be ended; at last, to every one’s surprise, Augustus was so completely victorious that no 
competitor remained to challenge his claim to power. 

To the Roman world, the discovery that the period of civil war was ended came as a surprise, 
which was a cause of rejoicing to all except a small senatorial party. To every one else, it was a 
profound relief when Rome, under Augustus, at last achieved the stability and order which Greeks 
and Macedonians had sought in vain, and which Rome, before Augustus, had also failed to 
produce. In Greece, accord- 


- 272 - 



ing to Rostovtseff, republican Rome had "introduced nothing new, except pauperization, 
bankruptcy, and a stoppage of all independent political activity." 

The reign of Augustus was a period of happiness for the Roman Empire. The administration of 
the provinces was at last organized with some regard to the welfare of the population, and not 
on a purely predatory system. Augustus was not only officially deified after his death, but was 
spontaneously regarded as a god in various provincial cities. Poets praised him, the commercial 
classes found the universal peace convenient, and even the Senate, which he treated with all the 
outward forms of respect, lost no opportunity of heaping honours and offices on his head. 

But although the world was happy, some savour had gone out of life, since safety had been 
preferred to adventure. In early times, every free Greek had had the opportunity of adventure; 
Philip and Alexander put an end to this state of affairs, and in the Hellenistic world only 
Macedonian dynasts enjoyed anarchic freedom. The Greek world lost its youth, and became 
either cynical or religious. The hope of embodying ideals in earthly institutions faded, and with 
it the best men lost their zest. Heaven, for Socrates, was a place where, he could go on arguing; 
for philosophers after Alexander, it was something more different from their existence here 
below. 

In Rome, a similar development came later, and in a less painful form. Rome was not 
conquered, as Greece was, but had, on the contrary, the stimulus of successful imperialism. 
Throughout the period of the civil wars, it was Romans who were responsible for the disorders. 
The Greeks had not secured peace and order by submitting to the Macedonians, whereas both 
Greeks and Romans secured both by submitting to Augustus. Augustus was a Roman, to whom 
most Romans submitted willingly, not only on account of his superior power; moreover he took 
pains to disguise the military origin of his government, and to base it upon decrees of the 
Senate. The adulation expressed by the Senate was, no doubt, largely insincere, but outside the 
senatorial class no one felt humiliated. 

The mood of the Romans was like that of a jeune homme rangA© in nineteenth-century France, 
who, after a life of amatory adventure, 


* History of the Ancient World, Vol. II, p. 255. 


- 273 - 


settles down to a marriage of reason. This mood, though contented, is not creative. The great poets 
of the Augustan age had been formed in more troubled times; Horace fled at Philippi, and both he 
and Vergil lost their farms in confiscations for the benefit of victorious soldiers. Augustus, for the 
sake of stability, set to work, somewhat insincerely, to restore ancient piety, and was therefore 
necessarily rather hostile to free inquiry. The Roman world began to become stereotyped, and the 
process continued under later emperors. 

The immediate successors of Augustus indulged in appalling cruelties towards Senators and 
towards possible competitors for the purple. To some extent, the misgovernment of this period 
extended to the provinces; but in the main the administrative machine created by Augustus 
continued to function fairly well. 

A better period began with the accession of Trajan in A.D. 98, and continued until the death of 
Marcus Aurelius in A.D. 180. During this time, the government of the Empire was as good as any 
despotic government can be. The third century, on the contrary, was one of appalling disaster. The 
army realized its power, made and unmade emperors in return for cash and the promise of a life 
without warfare, and ceased, in consequence, to be an effective fighting force. The barbarians, 
from north and east, invaded and plundered Roman territory. The army, preoccupied with private 
gain and civil discord, was incompetent in defence. The whole fiscal system broke down, since 
there was an immense diminution of resources and, at the same time, a vast increase of 
expenditure in unsuccessful war and in bribery of the army. Pestilence, in addition to war, greatly 
diminished the population. It seemed as if the Empire was about to fall. 

This result was averted by two energetic men, Diocletian ( A.D. 286-305) and Constantine, whose 
undisputed reign lasted from A.D. 3 12 to 337. By then the Empire was divided into an eastern and 
a western half, corresponding, approximately, to the division between the Greek and Latin 
languages. By Constantine the capital of the eastern half was established at Byzantium, to which 
he gave the new name of Constantinople. Diocletian curbed the anny, for a while, by altering its 
character; from his time onwards, the most effective fighting forces were composed of barbarians, 
chiefly German, to whom all the highest commands were open. This was obviously a dangerous 
expedient, and early in the fifth century it bore its natural 


- 274 - 



fruit. The barbarians decided that it was more profitable to fight for themselves than for a 
Roman master. Nevertheless it served its purpose for over a century. Diocletian’s administrative 
reforms were equally successful for a time, and equally disastrous in the long run. The Roman 
system was to allow local self-government to the towns, and to leave their officials to collect 
the taxes, of which only the total amount due from any one town was fixed by the central 
authorities. This system had worked well enough in prosperous times, but now, in the exhausted 
state of the empire, the revenue demanded was more than could be borne without excessive 
hardship. The municipal authorities were personally responsible for the taxes, and fled to escape 
payment. Diocletian compelled well-to-do citizens to accept municipal office, and made flight 
illegal. From similar motives he turned the rural population into serfs, tied to the soil and 
forbidden to migrate. This system was kept on by later emperors. 

Constantine's most important innovation was the adoption of Christianity as the State religion, 
apparently because a large proportion of the soldiers were Christian. ^_The result of this was 
that when, during the fifth century, the Germans destroyed the Western Empire, its prestige 
caused them to adopt the Christian religion, thereby preserving for western Europe so much of 
ancient civilization as had been absorbed by the Church. 

The development of the territory assigned to the eastern half of the Empire was different. The 
Eastern Empire, though continually diminishing in extent (except for the transient conquests of 
Justinian in the sixth century), survived until 1453, when Constantinople was conquered by the 
Turks. But most of what had been Roman provinces in the east, including also Africa and Spain 
in the west, became Mohammedan. The Arabs, unlike the Germans, rejected the religion, but 
adopted the civilization, of those whom they had conquered. The Eastern Empire was Greek, 
not Latin, in its civilization; accordingly, from the seventh to the eleventh centuries, it was the 
Arabs who preserved Greek literature and whatever survived of Greek, as opposed to Latin, 
civilization. From the eleventh century onward, at first through Moorish influences, the west 
gradually recovered what it had lost of the Grecian heritage. 


* See Rostovtseff, History of the Ancient World, Vol. II, p. 332. 


- 275 - 


I come now to the four ways in which the Roman Empire affected the history of culture. 

I. The direct effect of Rome on Greek thought. This begins in the second century B.C., with 
two men, the historian Polybius, and the Stoic philosopher Panaetius. The natural attitude of the 
Greek to the Roman was one of contempt mingled with fear; the Greek felt himself more 
civilized, but politically less powerful. If the Romans were more successful in politics, that only 
showed that politics is an ignoble pursuit. The average Greek of the second century B.C. was 
pleasure-loving, quick-witted, clever in business, and unscrupulous in all things. There were, 
however, still men of philosophic capacity. Some of these— notably the sceptics, such as 
Carneades-had allowed cleverness to destroy seriousness. Some, like the Epicureans and a section 
of the Stoics, had withdrawn wholly into a quiet private life. But a few, with more insight than had 
been shown by Aristotle in relation to Alexander, realized that the greatness of Rome was due to 
certain merits which were lacking among the Greeks. 

The historian Polybius, born in Arcadia about 200 B.C., was sent to Rome as a prisoner, and there 
had the good fortune to become the friend of the younger Scipio, whom he accompanied on many 
of his campaigns. It was uncommon for a Greek to know Latin, though most educated Romans 
knew Greek; the circumstances of Polybius, however, led him to a thorough familiarity with Latin. 
He wrote, for the benefit of the Greeks, the history of the Punic Wars, which had enabled Rome to 
conquer the world. His admiration of the Roman constitution was becoming out of date while he 
wrote, but until his time it had compared very favorably, in stability and efficiency, with the 
continually changing constitutions of most Greek cities. The Romans naturally read his history 
with pleasure; whether the Greeks did so is more doubtful. 

Panaetius the Stoic has been already considered in the preceding chapter. He was a friend of 
Polybius, and, like him, a protA©gA© of the younger Scipio. While Scipio lived, he was 
frequently in Rome, but after Scipio's death in 129 B.C. he stayed in Athens as head of the Stoic 
school. Rome still had, what Greece had lost, the hopefulness connected with the opportunity for 
political activity. Accordingly the doctrines of Panaetius were more political, and less akin to 
those 


- 276 - 



of the Cynics, than were those of earlier Stoics. Probably the admiration of Plato felt by cultivated 
Romans influenced him in abandoning the dogmatic narrowness of his Stoic predecessors. In the 
broader fonn given to it by him and by his successor Posidonius, Stoicism strongly appealed to the 
more serious among the Romans. 

At a later date, Epictetus, though a Greek, lived most of his life in Rome. Rome supplied him with 
most of his illustrations; he is always exhorting the wise man not to tremble in the presence of the 
Emperor. We know the influence of Epictetus on Marcus Aurelius, but his influence on the 
Greeks is hard to trace. 

Plutarch (ca. A.D. 46-120), in his Lives of the Noble Grecians and Romans, traced a parallelism 
between the most eminent men of the two countries. He spent a considerable time in Rome, and 
was honoured by the Emperors Hadrian and Trajan. In addition to his Lives, he wrote numerous 
works on philosophy, religion, natural history, and morals. His Lives are obviously concerned to 
reconcile Greece and Rome in man’s thoughts. 

On the whole, apart from such exceptional men, Rome acted as a blight on the Greek-speaking 
part of the Empire. Thought and art alike declined. Until the end of the second century A.D., life, 
for the well-to-do, was pleasant and easy-going; there was no incentive to strenuousness, and little 
opportunity for great achievement. The recognized schools of philosophy— the Academy, the 
Peripatetics, the Epicureans, and the Stoics— continued to exist until they were closed by Justinian, 
from Christian bigotry, in the year A.D. 529. None of these, however, showed any vitality 
throughout the time after Marcus Aurelius, except the Neoplatonists in the third century A.D., 
whom we shall consider in the next chapter; and these men were hardly at all influenced by Rome. 
The Latin and Greek halves of the Empire became more and more divergent; the knowledge of 
Greek became rare in the west, and after Constantine Latin, in the east, survived only in law and in 
the army. 

II. The influence of Greece and the East in Rome. There are here two very different things to 
consider: first, the influence of Hellenic art and literature and philosophy on the most cultivated 
Romans; second, the spread of non-Hellenic religions and superstitions throughout the Western 
world. 

(1) When the Romans first came in contact with Greeks, they 


- 277 - 



became aware of themselves as comparatively barbarous and uncouth. The Greeks were 
immeasurably their superiors in many ways: in manufacture and in the technique of agriculture; in 
the kinds of knowledge that are necessary for a good official; in conversation and the art of 
enjoying life; in art and literature and philosophy. The only things in which the Romans were 
superior were military tactics and social cohesion. The relation of the Romans to the Greeks was 
something like that of the Prussians to the French in 1814 and 1815; but this latter was temporary, 
whereas the other lasted a long time. After the Punic Wars, young Romans conceived an 
admiration for the Greeks. They learnt the Greek language, they copied Greek architecture, they 
employed Greek sculptors. The Roman gods were identified with the gods of Greece. The Trojan 
origin of the Romans was invented to make a connection with the Homeric myths. Latin poets 
adopted Greek metres, Latin philosophers took over Greek theories. To the end, Rome was 
culturally parasitic on Greece. The Romans invented no art forms, constructed no original system 
of philosophy, and made no scientific discoveries. They made good roads, systematic legal codes, 
and efficient armies; for the rest they looked to Greece. 

The Hellenizing of Rome brought with it a certain softening of manners, abhorrent to the elder 
Cato. Until the Punic Wars, the Romans had been a bucolic people, with the virtues and vices of 
farmers: austere, industrious, brutal, obstinate, and stupid. Their family life had been stable and 
solidly built on the patria potestas; women and young people were completely subordinated. All 
this changed with the influx of sudden wealth. The small fanns disappeared, and were gradually 
replaced by huge estates on which slave labour was employed to carry out new scientific kinds of 
agriculture. A great class of traders grew up, and a large number of men enriched by plunder, like 
the nabobs in eighteenth-century England. Women, who had been virtuous slaves, became free 
and dissolute; divorce became common; the rich ceased to have children. The Greeks, who had 
gone through a similar development centuries ago, encouraged, by their example, what historians 
call the decay of morals. Even in the most dissolute times of the Empire, the average Roman still 
thought of Rome as the upholder of a purer ethical standard against the decadent corruption of 
Greece. 


- 278 - 



The cultural influence of Greece on the Western Empire diminished rapidly from the third 
century A.D. onwards, chiefly because culture in general decayed. For this there were many 
causes, but one in particular must be mentioned. In the last times of the Western Empire, the 
government was more undisguisedly a military tyranny than it had been, and the army usually 
selected a successful general as emperor; but the army, even in its highest ranks, was no longer 
composed of cultivated Romans, but of semi-barbarians from the frontier. These rough soldiers 
had no use for culture, and regarded the civilized citizens solely as sources of revenue. Private 
persons were too impoverished to support much in the way of education, and the State 
considered education unnecessary. Consequently, in the West, only a few men of exceptional 
learning continued to read Greek. 

(2) Non-Hellenic religion and superstition, on the contrary, acquired, as time went on, a firmer 
and firmer hold on the West. We have already seen how Alexander's conquests introduced the 
Greek world to the beliefs of Babylonians, Persians, and Egyptians. Similarly the Roman 
conquests made the Western world familiar with these doctrines, and also with those of Jews 
and Christians. I shall consider what concerns the Jews and Christians at a later stage; for the 
present, I shall confine myself as far as possible to pagan superstitions. 

In Rome every sect and every prophet was represented, and sometimes won favour in the 
highest government circles. Lucian, who stood for sane scepticism in spite of the credulity of 
his age, tells an amusing story, generally accepted as broadly true, about a prophet and miracle- 
worker called Alexander the Paphlagonian. This man healed the sick and foretold the future, 
with excursions into blackmail. His fame reached the ears of Marcus Aurelius, then fighting the 
Marcomanni on the Danube. The Emperor consulted him as to how to win the war, and was 
told that if he threw two lions into the Danube a great victory would result. He followed the 
advice of the seer, but it was the Marcomanni who won the great victory. In spite of this 
mishap, Alexander's fame continued to grow. A prominent Roman of consular rank, Rutilianus, 
after consulting him on many points, at last sought his advice as to the choice of a wife. 
Alexander, like Endymion, had enjoyed the favours of the moon, and by 


* See Cumont, Oriental Religions in Roman Paganism. 


- 279 - 


her had a daughter, whom the oracle recommended to Rutilianus. "Rutilianus, who was at the 
time sixty years old, at once complied with the divine injunction, and celebrated his marriage by 
sacrificing whole hecatombs to his celestial mother-in-law." 

More important than the career of Alexander the Paphlagonian was the reign of the Emperor 
Elogabalus or Heliogabalus ( A.D. 21822), who was, until his elevation by the choice of the 
army, a Syrian priest of the sun. In his slow progress from Syria to Rome, he was preceded by 
his portrait, sent as a present to the Senate. "He was drawn in his sacerdotal robes of silk and 
gold, after the loose flowing fashion of the Medes and Phoenicians; his head was covered with a 
lofty tiara, his numerous collars and bracelets were adorned with gems of inestimable value. His 
eyebrows were tinged with black, and his cheeks painted with an artificial red and white. The 
grave senators confessed with a sigh, that, after having long experienced the stern tyranny of 
their own countrymen, Rome was at length humbled beneath the effeminate luxury of Oriental 

despotism." ^-Supported by a large section in the army, he proceeded, with fanatical zeal, to 
introduce in Rome the religious practices of the East; his name was that of the sun-god 
worshipped at Emesa, where he had been chief priest. His mother, or grandmother, who was the 
real ruler, perceived that he had gone too far, and deposed him in favour of her nephew 
Alexander ( 222-35), whose Oriental proclivities were more moderate. The mixture of creeds 
that was possible in his day was illustrated in his private chapel, in which he placed the statues 
of Abraham, Orpheus, Apollonius of Tyana, and Christ. 

The religion of Mithras, which was of Persian origin, was a close competitor of Christianity, 
especially during the latter half of the third century A.D. The emperors, who were making 
desperate attempts to control the army, felt that religion might give a much needed stability; but 
it would have to be one of the new religions, since it was these that the soldiers favoured. The 
cult was introduced at Rome, and had much to commend it to the military mind. Mithras was a 
sun-god, but not so effeminate as his Syrian colleague; he was a god concerned with war, the 
great war between good and evil which 


* Benn, The Greek Philosophers, Vol. II, p. 226. 
c Gibbon, Ch. VI. 


- 280 - 


had been part of the Persian creed since Zoroaster. Rostovtseff ^reproduces a bas-relief 
representing his worship, which was found in a subterranean sanctuary at Heddernheim in 
Germany, and shows that his disciples must have been numerous among the soldiers not only in 
the East, but in the West also. 

Constantine's adoption of Christianity was politically successful, whereas earlier attempts to 
introduce a new religion failed; but the earlier attempts were, from a governmental point of 
view, very similar to his. All alike derived their possibility of success from the misfortunes and 
weariness of the Roman world. The traditional religions of Greece and Rome were suited to 
men interested in the terrestrial world, and hopeful of happiness on earth. Asia, with a longer 
experience of despair, had evolved more successful antidotes in the form of other-worldly 
hopes; of all these, Christianity was the most effective in bringing consolation. But Christianity, 
by the time it became the State religion, had absorbed much from Greece, and transmitted this, 
along with the Judaic element, to succeeding ages in the West. 

III. The unification of government and culture . We owe it first to Alexander and then to 
Rome that the achievements of the great age of Greece were not lost to the world, like those of 
the Minoan age. In the fifth century B.C., a Genghiz Khan, if one had happened to arise, could 
have wiped out all that was important in the Hellenic world; Xerxes, with a little more 
competence, might have made Greek civilization very greatly inferior to what it became after he 
was repulsed. Consider the period from Aeschylus to Plato: all that was done in this time was 
done by a minority of the population of a few commercial cities. These cities, as the future 
showed, had no great capacity for withstanding foreign conquest, but by an extraordinary stroke 
of good fortune their conquerors, Macedonian and Roman, were Philhellenes, and did not 
destroy what they conquered, as Xerxes or Carthage would have done. The fact that we are 
acquainted with what was done by the Greeks in art and literature and philosophy and science is 
due to the stability introduced by Western conquerors who had the good sense to admire the 
civilization which they governed but did their utmost to preserve. 


* History of the Ancient World, II, p. 343. 


- 281 - 


In certain respects, political and ethical, Alexander and the Romans were the causes of a better 
philosophy than any that was professed by Greeks in their days of freedom. The Stoics, as we have 
seen, believed in the brotherhood of man, and did not confine their sympathies to the Greeks. The 
long dominion of Rome accustomed men to the idea of a single civilization under a single 
government. We are aware that there were important parts of the world which were not subject to 
Rome— India and China, more especially. But to the Roman it seemed that outside the Empire 
there were only obscure barbarian tribes, who might be conquered whenever it should be worth 
while to make the effort. Essentially and in idea, the empire, in the minds of the Romans, was 
world-wide. This conception descended to the Church, which was "Catholic" in spite of 
Buddhists, Confucians, and (later) Mohammedans. Securus judicat orbis terrarum is a maxim 
taken over by the Church from the later Stoics; it owes its appeal to the apparent universality of 
the Roman Empire. Throughout the Middle Ages, after the time of Charlemagne, the Church and 
the Holy Roman Empire were world-wide in idea, although everybody knew that they were not so 
in fact. The conception of one human family, one Catholic religion, one universal culture, and one 
worldwide State, has haunted men's thoughts ever since its approximate realization by Rome. 

The part played by Rome in enlarging the area of civilization was of immense importance. 
Northern Italy, Spain, France, and parts of western Gennany, were civilized as a result of forcible 
conquest by the Roman legions. All these regions proved themselves just as capable of a high 
level of culture as Rome itself. In the last days of the Western Empire, Gaul produced men who 
were at least the equals of their contemporaries in regions of older civilization. It was owing to the 
diffusion of culture by Rome that the barbarians produced only a temporary eclipse, not a 
pennanent darkness. It may be argued that the quality of civilization was never again as good as in 
the Athens of Pericles; but in a world of war and destruction, quantity is, in the long run, almost as 
important as quality, and quantity was due to Rome. 

IV. The Mohammedans as vehicles of Hellenism . In the seventh century, the disciples of the 
Prophet conquered Syria, Egypt, and North Africa; in the following century, they conquered 
Spain. Their 


- 282 - 



victories were easy, and the fighting was slight. Except possibly during the first few years, they 
were not fanatical; Christians and Jews were unmolested so long as they paid the tribute. Very 
soon the Arabs acquired the civilization of the Eastern Empire, but with the hopefulness of a 
rising polity instead of the weariness of decline. Their learned men read Greek, and wrote 
commentaries. Aristotle's reputation is mainly due to them; in antiquity, he was seldom 
mentioned, and was not regarded as on a level with Plato. 

It is instructive to consider some of the words that we derive from Arabic, such as: algebra, 
alcohol, alchemy, alembic, alkali, azimuth, zenith. With the exception of "alcohol"— which 
meant, not a drink, but a substance used in chemistry— these words would give a good picture of 
some of the things we owe to the Arabs. Algebra had been invented by the Alexandrian Greeks, 
but was carried further by the Mohammedans. "Alchemy," "alembic," "alkali" are words 
connected with the attempt to turn base metals into gold, which the Arabs took over from the 
Greeks, and in pursuit of which they appealed to Greek philosophy. Azimuth" and "zenith" 
are astronomical terms, chiefly useful to the Arabs in connection with astrology. 

The etymological method conceals what we owe to the Arabs as regards knowledge of Greek 
philosophy, because, when it was again studied in Europe, the technical terms required were 
taken from Greek or Latin. In philosophy, the Arabs were better as commentators than as 
original thinkers. Their importance, for us, is that they, and not the Christians, were the 
immediate inheritors of those parts of the Greek tradition which only the Eastern Empire had 
kept alive. Contact with the Mohammedans, in Spain, and to a lesser extent in Sicily, made the 
West aware of Aristotle; also of Arabic numerals, algebra, and chemistry. It was this contact 
that began the revival of learning in the eleventh century, leading to the Scholastic philosophy. 

It was much later, from the thirteenth century onward, that the study of Greek enabled men to 
go direct to the works of Plato and Aristotle and other Greek writers of antiquity. But if the 
Arabs had not preserved the tradition, the men of the Renaissance might not have suspected 
how much was to be gained by the revival of classical learning. 


* See Alchemy, Child of Greek Philosophy, by Arthur John Hopkins, Columbia, 1934. 


- 283 - 


CHAPTER XXX Plotinus 


PLOTINUS ( A.D. 204-270), the founder of Neoplatonism, is the last of the great philosophers of 
antiquity. His life is almost coextensive with one of the most disastrous periods in Roman history. 
Shortly before his birth, the army had become conscious of its power, and had adopted the 
practice of choosing emperors in return for monetary rewards, and assassinating them afterwards 
to give occasion for a renewed sale of the Empire. These preoccupations unfitted the soldiers for 
the defence of the frontier, and permitted vigorous incursions of Germans from the north and 
Persians from the East. War and pestilence diminished the population of the Empire by about a 
third, while increased taxation and diminished resources caused financial ruin in even those 
provinces to which no hostile forces penetrated. The cities, which had been the bearers of culture, 
were especially hard hit; substantial citizens, in large numbers, fled to escape the tax-collector. It 
was not till after the death of Plotinus that order was re-established and the Empire temporarily 
saved by the vigorous measures of Diocletian and Constantine. 

Of all this there is no mention in the works of Plotinus. He turned aside from the spectacle of ruin 
and misery in the actual world, to contemplate an eternal world of goodness and beauty. In this he 
was in harmony with all the most serious men of his age. To all of them, Christians and pagans 
alike, the world of practical affairs seemed to offer no hope, and only the Other World seemed 
worthy of allegiance. To the Christian, the Other World was the Kingdom of Heaven, to be 
enjoyed after death; to the Platonist, it was the eternal world of ideas, the real world as opposed to 
that of illusory appearance. Christian theologians combined these points of view, and embodied 
much of the philosophy of Plotinus. Dean Inge, in his invaluable book on Plotinus, rightly 
emphasises what Christianity owes to him. "Platon- 

- 284 - 



ism," he says, "is part of the vital structure of Christian theology, with which no other philosophy, 
I venture to say, can work without friction." There is, he says, an "utter impossibility of excising 
Platonism from Christianity without tearing Christianity to pieces." He points out that Saint 
Augustine speaks of Plato's system as "the most pure and bright in all philosophy," and of Plotinus 
as a man in whom "Plato lived again," and who, if he had lived a little later, would have "changed 
a few words and phrases and become Christian." Saint Thomas Aquinas, according to Dean Inge, 
"is nearer to Plotinus than to the real Aristotle." 

Plotinus, accordingly, is historically important as an influence in moulding the Christianity of the 
Middle Ages and of Catholic theology. The historian, in speaking of Christianity, has to be careful 
to recognize the very great changes that it has undergone, and the variety of forms that it may 
assume even at one epoch. The Christianity of the Synoptic Gospels is almost innocent of 
metaphysics. The Christianity of modern America, in this respect, is like primitive Christianity; 
Platonism is alien to popular thought and feeling in the United States, and most American 
Christians are much more concerned with duties here on earth, and with social progress in the 
every-day world, than with the transcendental hopes that consoled men when everything terrestrial 
inspired despair. I am not speaking of any change of dogma, but of a difference of emphasis and 
interest. A modern Christian, unless he realizes how great this difference is, will fail to understand 
the Christianity of the past. We, since our study is historical, are concerned with the effective 
beliefs of past centuries, and as to these it is impossible to disagree with what Dean Inge says on 
the influence of Plato and Plotinus. 

Plotinus, however, is not only historically important. He represents, better than any other 
philosopher, an important type of theory. A philosophical system may be judged important for 
various different kinds of reasons. The first and most obvious is that we think it may be true. Not 
many students of philosophy at the present time would feel this about Plotinus; Dean Inge is, in 
this respect, a rare exception. But truth is not the only merit that a metaphysic can possess. It may 
have beauty, and this is certainly to be found in Plotinus; there are passages that remind one of the 
later cantos of Dante's Para- 


- 285 - 



diso, and of almost nothing else in literature. Now and again, his descriptions of the eternal world 
of glory 

To our high- wrought fantasy present That undisturbed song of pure concent Aye sung before the 
sapphire-coloured throne To Him that sits thereon. 

Again, a philosophy may be important because it expresses well what men are prone to believe in 
certain moods or in certain cirmumstances. Uncomplicated joy and sorrow is not matter for 
philosophy, but rather for the simpler kinds of poetry and music. Only joy and sorrow 
accompanied by reflection on the universe generate metaphysical theories. A man may be a 
cheerful pessimist or a melancholy optimist. Perhaps Samuel Butler may serve as an example of 
the first; Plotinus is an admirable example of the second. In an age such as that in which he lived, 
unhappiness is immediate and pressing, whereas happiness, if attainable at all, must be sought by 
reflection upon things that are remote from the impressions of sense. Such happiness has in it 
always an element of strain; it is very unlike the simple happiness of a child. And since it is not 
derived from the every-day world, but from thought and imagination, it demands a power of 
ignoring or despising the life of the senses. It is, therefore, not those who enjoy instinctive 
happiness who invent the kinds of metaphysical optimism that depend upon belief in the reality of 
a super-sensible world. Among the men who have been unhappy in a mundane sense, but 
resolutely detennined to find a higher happiness in the world of theory, Plotinus holds a very high 
place. 

Nor are his purely intellectual merits by any means to be despised. He has, in many respects, 
clarified Plato's teaching; he has developed, with as much consistency as possible, the type of 
theory advocated by him in common with many others. His arguments against materialism are 
good, and his whole conception of the relation of soul and body is clearer than that of Plato or 
Aristotle. 

Like Spinoza, he has a certain kind of moral purity and loftiness, which is very impressive. He is 
always sincere, never shrill or censorious, invariably concerned to tell the reader, as simply as he 
can, what he believes to be important. Whatever one may think of him as a theoretical 
philosopher, it is impossible not to love him as a man. 


- 286 - 



The life of Plotinus is known, so far as it is known, through the biography written by his friend 
and disciple Porphyry, a Semite whose real name was Malchus. There are, however, miraculous 
elements in this account, which make it difficult to place a complete reliance upon its more 
credible portions. 

Plotinus considered his spatio-temporal appearance unimportant, and was loath to talk about the 
accidents of his historical existence. He stated, however, that he was bom in Egypt, and it is 
known that as a young man he studied in Alexandria, where he lived until the age of thirty-nine, 
and where his teacher was Ammonius Saccas, often regarded as the founder of neoplatonism. 

He then joined the expedition of the Emperor Gordian III against the Persians, with the 
intention, it is said, of studying the religions of the East. The Emperor was still a youth, and was 
murdered by the army, as was at that time the custom. This occurred during his campaign in 
Mesopotamia in A.D. 244. Plotinus thereupon abandoned his oriental projects and settled in 
Rome, where he soon began to teach. Among his hearers were many influential men, and he 
was favoured by the Emperor Gallienus. f_At one time he formed a project of founding Plato's 
Republic in the Campania, and building for the purpose a new city to be called Platonopolis. 

The Emperor, at first, was favourable, but ultimately withdrew his permission. It may seem 
strange that there should be room for a new city so near Rome, but probably by that time the 
region was malarial, as it is now, but had not been earlier. He wrote nothing until the age of 
forty-nine; after that, he wrote much. His works were edited and arranged by Porphyry, who 
was more Pythagorean than Plotinus, and caused the Neoplatonist school to become more 
supernaturalist than it would have been if it had followed Plotinus more faithfully. 

The respect of Plotinus for Plato is very great; Plato is usually alluded to as "He." In general, the 
"blessed ancients" are treated with reverence, but this reverence does not extend to the atomists. 
The 


* Concerning Gallienus, Gibbon remarks: "He was a master of several curious but useless 
sciences, a ready orator and an elegant poet, a skillful gardener, an excellent cook, and 
most contemptible prince. When the great emergencies of the State required his presence 
and attention, he was engaged in conversation with the philosopher Plotinus, wasting his 
time in trifling or licentious pleasures, preparing his initiation to the Grecian mysteries, or 
soliciting a place in the Areopagus of Athens" (Ch. X). 


- 287 - 


Stoics and Epicureans, being still active, are controverted, the Stoics only for their materialism, 
the Epicureans for every part of their philosophy. Artistotle plays a larger part than appears, as 
borrowings from him are often unacknowledged. One feels the influence of Parmenides at many 
points. 

The Plato of Plotinus is not so full-blooded as the real Plato. The theory of ideas, the mystical 
doctrines of the Phaedo and of Book VI of the Republic, and the discussion of love in the 
Symposium, make up almost the whole of Plato as he appears in the Enneads (as the books of 
Plotinus are called). The political interests, the search for definitions of separate virtues, the 
pleasure in mathematics, the dramatic and affectionate appreciation of individuals, and above 
all the playfulness of Plato, are wholly absent from Plotinus. Plato, as Carlyle said, is "very 
much at his ease in Zion"; Plotinus, on the contrary, is always on his best behaviour. 

The metaphysics of Plotinus begins with a Holy Trinity: The One, Spirit and Soul. These three 
are not equal, like the Persons of the Christian Trinity; the One is supreme, Spirit comes next, 
and Soul last. 

The One is somewhat shadowy. It is sometimes called God, sometimes the Good; it transcends 
Being, which is the first sequent upon the One. We must not attribute predicates to it, but only 
say "It is." (This is reminiscent of Parmenides.) It would be a mistake to speak of God as "the 
All," because God transcends the All. God is present through all things. The One can be present 
without any coming: "while it is nowhere, nowhere is it not." Although the One is sometimes 

spoken of as the Good, we are also told that it precedes both the Good and the Beautiful. — 
Sometimes, the One appears to resemble Aristotle's God; we are told that God has no need of 
his derivatives, and ignores the created world. The One is indefinable, and in regard to it there 
is more truth in silence than in any words whatever. 

We now come to the Second Person, whom Plotinus calls nous. It is always difficult to find an 
English word to represent nous. The 


* Origen, who was a contemporary of Plotinus and had the same teacher in philosophy, 
taught that the First Person was superior to the Second, and the Second to the Third, 
agreeing in this with Plotinus. But Origen’s view was subsequently declared heretical. 

a 

g Fifth Enmead, Fifth Tractate, Chap. 12. 


- 288 - 


standard dictionary translation is "mind," but this does not have the correct connotations, 
particularly when the word is used in a religious philosophy. If we were to say that Plotinus put 
mind above soul, we should give a completely wrong impression. McKenna, the translator of 
Plotinus, uses "Intellectual-Principle," but this is awkward, and does not suggest an object suitable 
for religious veneration. Dean Inge uses "Spirit," which is perhaps the best word available. But it 
leaves out the intellectual element which was important in all Greek religious philosophy after 
Pythagoras. Mathematics, the world of ideas, and all thought about what is not sensible, have, for 
Pythagoras, Plato, and Plotinus, something divine; they constitute the activity of nous, or at least 
the nearest approach to its activity that we can conceive. It was this intellectual element in Plato's 
religion that led Christians— notably the author of Saint John's Gospel— to identify Christ with the 
Logos. Logos should be translated "reason" in this connection; this prevents us from using 
"reason" as the translation of nous. I shall follow Dean Inge in using "Spirit," but with the proviso 
that nous has an intellectual connotation which is absent from "Spirit" as usually understood. But 
often I shall use the word nous untranslated. 

Nous, we are told, is the image of the One; it is engendered because the One, in its self-quest, has 
vision; this seeing is nous. This is a difficult conception. A Being without parts, Plotinus says, 
may know itself; in this case, the seer and the seen are one. In God, who is conceived, as by Plato, 
on the analogy of the sun, the light-giver and what is lit are the same. Pursuing the analogy, now 
may be considered as the light by which the One sees itself. It is possible for us to know the 
Divine Mind, which we forget through self-will. To know the Divine Mind, we must study our 
own soul when it is most god-like: we must put aside the body, and the part of the soul that 
moulded the body, and "sense with desires and impulses and every such futility;" what is then left 
is an image of the Divine Intellect. 

"Those divinely possessed and inspired have at least the knowledge that they hold some greater 
thing within them, though they cannot tell what it is; from the movements that stir them and the 
utterances that come from them they perceive the power, not themselves, that moves them: in the 
same way, it must be, we stand towards the Supreme when we hold nous pure; we know the 
Divine Mind within, that which gives Being and all else of that order: but we know, too, 


- 289 - 



that other, know that it is none of these, but a nobler principle than anything we know as Being; 
fuller and greater; above reason, mind, and feeling; conferring these powers, not to be 
confounded with them." 

Thus when we are "divinely possessed and inspired" we see not only nous, but also the One. 
When we are thus in contact with the Divine, we cannot reason or express the vision in words; 
this comes later. "At the moment of touch there is no power whatever to make any affirmation; 
there is no leisure; reasoning upon the vision is for afterwards. We may know we have had the 
vision when the Soul has suddenly taken light. This light is from the Supreme and is the 
Supreme; we may believe in the Presence when, like that other God on the call of a certain man, 
He comes bringing light; the light is the proof of the advent. Thus, the Soul unlit remains 
without that vision; lit, it possesses what it sought. And this is the true end set before the Soul, 
to take that light, to see the Supreme by the Supreme and not by the light of any other 
principle— to see the Supreme which is also the means to the vision; for that which illumines the 
Soul is that which it is to see just as it is by the sun's own light that we see the sun. 

"But how is this to be accomplished? "Cut away everything." 

The experience of "ecstasy" (standing outside one's own body) happened frequently to Plotinus: 

Many times it has happened: Lifted out of the body into myself; becoming external to all other 
things and self-encentered; beholding a marvellous beauty; then, more than ever, assured of 
community with the loftiest order; enacting the noblest life, acquiring identity with the divine; 
stationing within It by having attained that activity; poised above whatsoever in the Intellectual 
is less than the Supreme: yet, there comes the moment of descent from intellection to reasoning, 
and after that sojourn in the divine, I ask myself how it happens that I can now be descending, 
and how did the Soul ever enter into my body, the Soul which even within the body, is the high 
thing it has shown itself to be. a€j 


* Enneads, V, 3, 14. McKenna's translation, 
a 

g Enneads, V, 3, 17. 
a 

€ IV, 8, 1. 
i 


- 290 - 


This brings us to Soul, the third and lowest member of the Trinity. Soul, though inferior to nous, 
is the author of all living things; it made the sun and moon and stars, and the whole visible world. 
It is the offspring of the Divine Intellect. It is double: there is an inner soul, intent on nous, and 
another, which faces the external. The latter is associated with a downward movement, in which 
the Soul generates its image, which is Nature and the world of sense. The Stoics had identified 
Nature with God, but Plotinus regards it as the lowest sphere, something emanating from the Soul 
when it forgets to look upward towards nous. This might suggest the Gnostic view that the visible 
world is evil, but Plotinus does not take this view. The visible world is beautiful, and is the abode 
of blessed spirits; it is only less good than the intellectual world. In a very interesting controversial 
discussion of the Gnostic view, that the cosmos and its Creator are evil, he admits that some parts 
of Gnostic doctrine, such as the hatred of matter, may be due to Plato, but holds that the other 
parts, which do not come from Plato, are untrue. 

His objections to Gnosticism are of two sorts. On the one hand, he says that Soul, when it creates 
the material world, does so from memory of the divine, and not because it is fallen; the world of 
sense, he thinks, is as good as a sensible world can be. He feels strongly the beauty of things 
perceived by the senses: 

Who that truly perceives the hannony of the Intellectual Realm could fail, if he has any bent 
towards music, to answer to the hannony in sensible sounds? What geometrician or arithmetician 
could fail to take pleasure in the symmetries, conespondences and principles of order observed in 
visible things? Consider, even, the case of pictures: Those seeing by the bodily sense the 
productions of the art of painting do not see the one thing in the one only way; they are deeply 
stirred by recognizing in the objects depicted to the eyes the presentation of what lies in the idea, 
and so are called to recollection of the truth— the very experience out of which Love rises. Now, if 
the sight of Beauty excellently reproduced upon a face hurries the mind to that other Sphere, 
surely no one seeing the loveliness lavish in the world of sense— this vast orderliness, the form 
which the stars even in their remoteness display— no one could be so dull-witted, so immoveable, 
as not to be carried by all this to recollection, and gripped by reverent awe in the thought of 


- 291 - 



all this, so great, sprung from that greatness. Not to answer thus could only be to have neither 
fathomed this world nor had any vision of that other ( II, 9, 16). 

There is another reason for rejecting the Gnostic view. The Gnostics think that nothing divine is 
associated with the sun, moon, and stars; they were created by an evil spirit. Only the soul of man, 
among things perceived, has any goodness. But Plotinus is firmly persuaded that the heavenly 
bodies are the bodies of god-like beings, immeasurably superior to man. According to the 
Gnostics, "their own soul, the soul of the least of mankind, they declare deathless, divine; but the 
entire heavens and the stars within the heavens have had no communion with the Immortal 
Principle, though these are far purer and lovelier than their own souls" ( II, 9, 5). For the view of 
Plotinus there is authority in the Timaeus, and it was adopted by some Christian Fathers, for 
instance, Origen. It is imaginatively attractive; it expresses feelings that the heavenly bodies 
naturally inspire, and makes man less lonely in the physical universe. 

There is in the mysticism of Plotinus nothing morose or hostile to beauty. But he is the last 
religious teacher, for many centuries, of whom this can be said. Beauty, and all the pleasures 
associated with it, came to be thought to be of the Devil; pagans, as well as Christians, came to 
glorify ugliness and dirt. Julian the Apostate, like contemporary orthodox saints, boasted of the 
populousness of his beard. Of all this, there is nothing in Plotinus. 

Matter is created by Soul, and has no independent reality. Every Soul has its hour; when that 
strikes, it descends, and enters the body suitable to it. The motive is not reason, but something 
more analogous to sexual desire. When the soul leaves the body, it must enter another body if it 
has been sinful, for justice requires that it should be punished. If, in this life, you have murdered 
your mother, you will, in the next life, be a woman, and be murdered by your son ( III, 2, 13). Sin 
must be punished; but the punishment happens naturally, through the restless driving of the 
sinner's errors. 

Do we remember this life after we are dead? The answer is perfectly logical, but not what most 
modem theologians would say. Memory is concerned with our life in time, whereas our best and 
truest life is in eternity. Therefore, as the soul grows towards eternal 


- 292 - 



life, it will remember less and less; friends, children, wife, will be gradually forgotten; ultimately, 
we shall know nothing of the things of this world, but only contemplate the intellectual realm. 
There will be no memory of personality, which, in contemplative vision, is unaware of itself. The 
soul will become one with nous, but not to its own destruction: nous and the individual soul will 
be simultaneously two and one ( IV, 4, 2). 

In the Fourth Ennead, which is on the Soul, one section, the Seventh Tractate, is devoted to the 
discussion of immortality. 

The body, being compound, is clearly not immortal; if, then, it is part of us, we are not wholly 
immortal. But what is the relation of the soul to the body? Aristotle (who is not mentioned 
explicitly) said the soul was the form of the body, but Plotinus rejects this view, on the ground 
that the intellectual act would be impossible if the soul were any form of body. The Stoics think 
that the soul is material, but the unity of the soul proves that this is impossible. Moreover, since 
matter is passive, it cannot have created itself; matter could not exist if soul had not created it, 
and, if soul did not exist, matter would disappear in a twinkling. The soul is neither matter nor the 
form of a material body, but Essence, and Essence is eternal. This view is implicit in Plato's 
argument that the soul is immortal because ideas are eternal; but it is only with Plotinus that it 
becomes explicit. 

How does the soul enter the body from the aloofness of the intellectual world? The answer is, 
through appetite. But appetite, though sometimes ignoble, may be comparatively noble. At best, 
the soul "has the desire of elaborating order on the model of what it has seen in the Intellectual- 
Principle (nous).” That is to say, soul contemplates the inward realm of essence, and wishes to 
produce something, as like it as possible, that can be seen by looking without instead of looking 
within— like (we might say) a composer who first imagines his music, and then wishes to hear it 
performed by an orchestra. 

But this desire of the soul to create has unfortunate results. So long as the soul lives in the pure 
world of essence, it is not separated from other souls living in the same world; but as soon as it 
becomes joined to a body, it has the task of governing what is lower than itself, and by this task it 
becomes separate from other souls, which have other bodies. Except in a few men at a few 
moments, the soul becomes 


- 293 - 



chained to the body. "The body obscures the truth, but there* all stands out clear and separate" ( 
IV, 9, 5). This doctrine, like Plato's, has difficulty in avoiding the view that the creation was a 
mistake. The soul at its best is content with nous, the world of essence; if it were always at its 
best, it would not create, but only contemplate. It seems that the act of creation is to be excused 
on the ground that the created world, in its main lines, is the best that is logically possible; but 
this is a copy of the eternal world, and as such has the beauty that is possible to a copy. The 
most definite statement is in the Tractate on the Gnostics ( II, 9, 8): 

To ask why the Soul has created the Kosmos, is to ask why there is a Soul and why a Creator 
creates. The question, also, implies a beginning in the eternal and, further, represents creation as 
the act of a changeful Being who turns from this to that. 

Those that think so must be instructed— if they would but bear with correction— in the nature of 
the Supernals, and brought to desist from that blasphemy of majestic powers which comes so 
easily to them, where all should be reverent scruple. 

Even in the administration of the Universe there is no ground for such attack, for it affords 
manifest proof of the greatness of the Intellectual Kind. 

This All that has emerged into life is no amorphous structure-like those lesser forms within it 
which are born night and day out of the lavishness of its vitality— the Universe is a life 
organised, effective, complex, all-comprehensive, displaying an unfathomable wisdom. How, 
then, can anyone deny that it is a clear image, beautifully formed, of the Intellectual Divinities? 
No doubt it is a copy, not original; but that is its very nature; it cannot be at once symbol and 
reality. But to say that it is an inadequate copy is false; nothing has been left out which a 
beautiful representation within the physical order could include. 

Such a reproduction there must necessarily be— though not by deliberation and contrivance— for 
the Intellectual could not be the last of things, but must have a double Act, one within itself, and 
one outgoing; there must, then, be something later than the Divine; 


* Plotinus habitually uses "There" as a Christian might— as it is used, for instance, in 
The life that knows no ending, The tearless life is There. 


- 294 - 



for only the thing with which all power ends fails to pass downwards something of itself. 

This is perhaps the best answer to the Gnostics that the principles of Plotinus make possible. The 
problem, in slightly different language, was inherited by Christian theologians; they, also, have 
found it difficult to account for the creation without allowing the blasphemous conclusion that, 
before it, something was lacking to the Creator. Indeed, their difficulty is greater than that of 
Plotinus, for he may say that the nature of Mind made creation inevitable, whereas, for the 
Christian, the world resulted from the untrammelled exercise of God's free will. 

Plotinus has a very vivid sense of a certain kind of abstract beauty. In describing the position of 
Intellect as intermediate between the One and Soul, he suddenly bursts out into a passage of rare 
eloquence: 

The Supreme in its progress could never be borne forward upon some soulless vehicle nor even 
directly upon the Soul: it will be heralded by some ineffable beauty: before the Great King in his 
progress there comes first the minor train, then rank by rank the greater and more exalted, closer 
to the King the kinglier; next his own honoured company until, last among all these grandeurs, 
suddenly appears the Supreme Monarch himself, and all— unless indeed for those who have 
contented themselves with the spectacle before his coming and gone away— prostrate themselves 
and hail him ( V, 5, 3). 

There is a Tractate on Intellectual Beauty, which shows the same kind of feeling ( V, 8): 

Assuredly all the gods are august and beautiful in a beauty beyond our speech. And what makes 
them so? Intellect; and especially Intellect operating within them (the divine sun and stars) to 
visibility. . . . 

To 'live at ease’ is There; and to these divine beings verity is mother and nurse, existence and 
sustenance; all that is not of process but of authentic being they see, and themselves in all; for all 
is transparent, nothing dark, nothing resistant; every being is lucid to every other, in breadth and 
depth; light runs through light. And each of them contains all within itself, and at the same time 
sees all in every other, so that everywhere there is all, and all is all and 


- 295 - 



each all, and infinite the glory. Each of them is great; the small is great; the sun, There, is all the 
stars; and every star, again, is all the stars and sun. While some manner of being is dominant in 
each, all are mirrored in every other. 

In addition to the imperfection which the world inevitably possesses because it is a copy, there is, 
for Plotinus as for the Christians, the more positive evil that results from sin. Sin is a consequence 
of free will, which Plotinus upholds as against the detenninists, and, more particularly, the 
astrologers. He does not venture to deny the validity of astrology altogether, but he attempts to set 
bounds to it, so as to make what remains compatible with free will. He does the same as regards 
magic; the sage, he says, is exempt from the power of the magician. Porphyry relates that a rival 
philosopher tried to put evil spells on Plotinus, but that, because of his holiness and wisdom, the 
spells recoiled on the rival. Porphyry, and all the followers of Plotinus, are much more 
superstitious than he is. Superstition, in him, is as slight as was possible in that age. 

Let us now endeavor to sum up the merits and defects of the doctrine taught by Plotinus, and in 
the main accepted by Christian theology so long as it remained systematic and intellectual. 

There is, first and foremost, the construction of what Plotinus believed to be a secure refuge for 
ideals and hopes, and one, moreover, which involved both moral and intellectual effort. In the 
third century, and in the centuries after the barbarian invasion, western civilization came near to 
total destruction. It was fortunate that, while theology was almost the sole surviving mental 
activity, the system that was accepted was not purely superstitious, but preserved, though 
sometimes deeply buried, doctrines which embodied much of the work of Greek intellect and 
much of the moral devotion that is common to the Stoics and the Neoplatonists. This made 
possible the rise of the scholastic philosophy, and later, with the Renaissance, the stimulus derived 
from the renewed study of Plato, and thence of the other ancients. 

On the other hand, the philosophy of Plotinus has the defect of encouraging men to look within 
rather than to look without: when we look within we see nous, which is divine, while when we 
look without we see the imperfections of the sensible world. This kind of subjectivity was a 
gradual growth; it is to be found in the doctrines 


- 296 - 



of Protagoras, Socrates, and Plato, as well as in the Stoics and Epicureans. But at first it was only 
doctrinal, not temperamental; for a long time it failed to kill scientific curiosity. We saw how 
Posidonius, about 100 B.C., travelled to Spain and the Atlantic coast of Africa to study the tides. 
Gradually, however, subjectivism invaded men's feelings as well as their doctrines. Science was 
no longer cultivated, and only virtue was thought important. Virtue, as conceived by Plato, 
involved all that was then possible in the way of mental achievement; but in later centuries it came 
to be thought of, increasingly, as involving only the virtuous will, and not a desire to understand 
the physical world or improve the world of human institutions. Christianity, in its ethical 
doctrines, was not free from this defect, although in practice belief in the importance of spreading 
the Christian faith gave a practicable object for moral activity, which was no longer confined to 
the perfecting of self. 

Plotinus is both an end and a beginning— an end as regards the Greeks, a beginning as regards 
Christendom. To the ancient world, weary with centuries of disappointment, exhausted by despair, 
his doctrine might be acceptable, but could not be stimulating. To the cruder barbarian world, 
where superabundant energy needed to be restrained and regulated rather than stimulated, what 
could penetrate in his teaching was beneficial, since the evil to be combated was not languor but 
brutality. The work of transmitting what could survive of his philosophy was performed by the 
Christian philosophers of the last age of Rome. 

-297- 

[This page intentionally left blank.] 

-298- 

Book Two CATHOLIC PHILOSOPHY 

-299- 


fTliis page intentionally left blank.] 
-300- 



Introduction 


CATHOLIC philosophy, in the sense in which I shall use the term, is that which dominated 
European thought from Augustine to the Renaissance. There have been philosophers, before and 
after this period of ten centuries, who belonged to the same general school. Before Augustine 
there were the early Fathers, especially Origen; after the Renaissance there are many, including, at 
the present day, all orthodox Catholic teachers of philosophy, who adhere to some medieval 
system, especially that of Thomas Aquinas. But it is only from Augustine to the Renaissance that 
the greatest philosophers of the age are concerned in building up or perfecting the Catholic 
synthesis. In the Christian centuries before Augustine, Stoics and Neoplatonists outshine the 
Fathers in philosophic ability; after the Renaissance, none of the outstanding philosophers, even 
among those who were orthodox Catholics, were concerned to carry on the Scholastic or the 
Augustinian tradition. 

The period with which we shall be concerned in this book differs from earlier and later times not 
only in philosophy, but in many other ways. The most notable of these is the power of the Church. 
The Church brought philosophic beliefs into a closer relation to social and political circumstances 
than they have ever had before or since the medieval period, which we may reckon from about 
A.D. 400 to about A.D. 1400. The Church is a social institution built upon a creed, partly 
philosophic, partly concerned with sacred history. It achieved power 

- 301 - 



and wealth by means of its creed. The lay rulers, who were in frequent conflict with it, were 
defeated because the great majority of the population, including most of the lay rulers themselves, 
were profoundly convinced of the truth of the Catholic faith. There were traditions, Roman and 
Germanic, against which the Church had to fight. The Roman tradition was strongest in Italy, 
especially among lawyers; the German tradition was strongest in the feudal aristocracy that arose 
out of the barbarian conquest. But for many centuries neither of these traditions proved strong 
enough to generate a successful opposition to the Church; and this was largely due to the fact that 
they were not embodied in any adequate philosophy. 

A history of thought, such as that upon which we are engaged, is unavoidably one-sided in dealing 
with the Middle Ages. With very few exceptions, all the men of this period who contributed to the 
intellectual life of their time were churchmen. The laity in the Middle Ages slowly built up a 
vigorous political and economic system, but their activities were in a sense blind. There was, in 
the later Middle Ages, an important lay literature, very different from that of the Church; in a 
general history, this literature would demand more consideration than is called for in a history of 
philosophic thought. It is not until we come to Dante that we find a layman writing with full 
knowledge of the ecclesiastical philosophy of his time. Until the fourteenth century, ecclesiastics 
have a virtual monopoly of philosophy, and philosophy, accordingly, is written from the 
standpoint of the Church. For this reason, medieval thought cannot be made intelligible without a 
fairly extensive account of the growth of ecclesiastical institutions, and especially of the papacy. 

The medieval world, as contrasted with the world of antiquity, is characterized by various forms 
of dualism. There is the dualism of clergy and laity, the dualism of Latin and Teuton, the dualism 
of the kingdom of God and the kingdoms of this world, the dualism of the spirit and the flesh. All 
these are exemplified in the dualism of Pope and Emperor. The dualism of Latin and Teuton is an 
outcome of the barbarian invasion, but the others have older sources. The relations of clergy and 
laity, for the Middle Ages, were to be modelled on the relations of Samuel and Saul; the demand 
for the supremacy of the clergy arose out of the period of Arian or semi-Arian emperors and kings. 
The dualism of the kingdom of God and the kingdoms of this 


- 302 - 



world is found in the New Testament, but was systematized in Saint Augustine City of God. The 
dualism of the spirit and the flesh is to be found in Plato, and was emphasized by the 
Neoplatonists; it is important in the teaching of Saint Paul; and it dominated the Christian 
asceticism of the fourth and fifth centuries. 

Catholic philosophy is divided into two periods by the dark ages, during which, in Western 
Europe, intellectual activity was almost non-existent. From the conversion of Constantine to the 
death of Boethius, the thoughts of Christian philosophers are still dominated by the Roman 
Empire, either as an actuality or as a recent memory. The barbarians, in this period, are regarded 
merely as a nuisance, not as an independent part of Christendom. There is still a civilized 
community, in which all well-to-do people can read and write, and a philosopher has to appeal to 
the laity as well as to the clergy. Between this period and the dark ages, at the end of the sixth 
century, stands Gregory the Great, who regards himself as a subject of the Byzantine emperor, but 
is lordly in his attitude to barbarian kings. After his time, throughout Western Christendom, the 
separation of clergy and laity becomes more and more marked. The lay aristocracy creates the 
feudal system, which slightly tempers the prevailing turbulent anarchy; Christian humility is 
preached by the clergy, but practised only by the lower classes; pagan pride is embodied in the 
duel, trial by battle, tournaments, and private revenge, all of which the Church dislikes but cannot 
prevent. With great difficulty, beginning in the eleventh century, the Church succeeds in 
emancipating itself from the feudal aristocracy, and this emancipation is one of the causes of the 
emergence of Europe from the dark ages. 

The first great period of Catholic philosophy was dominated by Saint Augustine, and by Plato 
among the pagans. The second period culminates in Saint Thomas Aquinas, for whom, and for his 
successors, Aristotle far outweighs Plato. The dualism of The City of God , however, survives in 
full force. The Church represents the City of God, and politically philosophers stand for the 
interests of the Church. Philosophy was concerned to defend the faith, and invoked reason to 
enable it to argue with those who, like the Mohammedans, did not accept the validity of the 
Christian revelation. By this invocation of reason the philosophers challenged criticism, not 
merely as theologians, but as inventors of systems designed to appeal to men of no 


- 303 - 



matter what creed. In the long run, the appeal to reason was perhaps a mistake, but in the 
thirteenth century it seemed highly successful. 

The thirteenth-century synthesis, which had an air of completeness and finality, was destroyed by 
a variety of causes. Perhaps the most important of these was the growth of a rich commercial 
class, first in Italy, and then elsewhere. The feudal aristocracy, in the main, had been ignorant, 
stupid, and barbaric; the common people had sided with the Church as superior to the nobles in 
intelligence, in morality, and in capacity to combat anarchy. But the new commercial class were as 
intelligent as the clergy, as well informed in mundane matters, more capable of coping with the 
nobles, and more acceptable to the urban lower classes as champions of civic liberty. Democratic 
tendencies came to the fore, and after helping the Pope to defeat the Emperor, set to work to 
emancipate economic life from ecclesiastical control. 

Another cause of the end of the Middle Ages was the rise of strong national monarchies in France, 
England, and Spain. Having suppressed internal anarchy, and allied themselves with the rich 
merchants against the aristocracy, the kings, after the middle of the fifteenth century, were strong 
enough to fight the Pope in the national interest. 

The papacy, meanwhile, had lost the moral prestige which it had enjoyed, and on the whole 
deserved, in the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries. First by subservience to France during 
the period when the popes lived at Avignon, then by the Great Schism, they had unintentionally 
persuaded the Western world that an unchecked papal autocracy was neither possible nor 
desirable. In the fifteenth century, their position as rulers of Christendom became subordinate, in 
practice, to their position as Italian princes, involved in the complex and unscrupulous game of 
Italian power politics. 

And so the Renaissance and the Reformation disrupted the medieval synthesis, which has not yet 
been succeeded by anything so tidy and so apparently complete. The growth and decay of this 
synthesis is the subject of Book II. 

The mood of thoughtful men, throughout the whole period, was one of deep unhappiness in regard 
to the affairs of this world, only rendered endurable by the hope of a better world hereafter. This 
unhappiness was a reflection of what was happening throughout Western Europe. The third 
century was a period of disaster, when the 


- 304 - 



general level of well-being was sharply lowered. After a lull during the fourth century, the fifth 
brought the extinction of the Western Empire and the establishment of barbarians throughout its 
former territory. The cultivated urban rich, upon whom late Roman civilization depended, were 
largely reduced to the condition of destitute refugees; the remainder took to living on their rural 
estates. Fresh shocks continued until about A.D. 1000, without any sufficient breathing space to 
allow of recovery. The wars of Byzantines and Lombards destroyed most of what remained of the 
civilization of Italy. The Arabs conquered most of the territory of the Eastern Empire, established 
themselves in Africa and Spain, threatened France, and even, on one occasion, sacked Rome. The 
Danes and Normans caused havoc in France and England, in Sicily and Southern Italy. Life, 
throughout these centuries, was precarious and full of hardship. Bad as it was in reality, gloomy 
superstitions made it even worse. It was thought that the great majority even of Christians would 
go to hell. At every moment, men felt themselves encompassed by evil spirits, and exposed to the 
machinations of sorcerers and witches. No joy of life was possible, except, in fortunate moments, 
to those who retained the thoughtlessness of children. The general misery heightened the intensity 
of religious feeling. The life of the good here below was a pilgrimage to the heavenly city; nothing 
of value was possible in the sublunary world except the steadfast virtue that would lead, in the 
end, to eternal bliss. The Greeks, in their great days, had found joy and beauty in the every-day 
world. Empedocles, apostrophizing his fellow-citizens, says: "Friends, that inhabit the great town 
looking down on the yellow rock of Acragas, up by the citadel, busy in goodly works, harbour of 
honour for the stranger, men unskilled in meanness, all hail." In later times, until the Renaissance, 
men had no such simple happiness in the visible world, but turned their hopes to the unseen. 
Acragas is replaced in their love by Jerusalem the Golden. When earthly happiness at last 
returned, the intensity of longing for the other world grew gradually less. Men used the same 
words, but with a less profound sincerity. 

In the attempt to make the genesis and significance of Catholic philosophy intelligible, I have 
found it necessary to devote more space to general history than is demanded in connection with 
either ancient 


- 305 - 



or modern philosophy. Catholic philosophy is essentially the philosophy of an institution, namely 
the Catholic Church; modern philosophy, even when it is far from orthodox, is largely concerned 
with problems, especially in ethics and political theory, which are derived from Christian views of 
the moral law and from Catholic doctrines as to the relations of Church and State. In GrAjco- 
Roman paganism there is no such dual loyalty as the Christian, from the very beginning, has owed 
to God and Caesar, or, in political terms, to Church and State. 

The problems raised by this dual loyalty were, for the most part, worked out in practice before the 
philosophers supplied the necessary theory. In this process there were two very distinct stages: one 
before the fall of the Western Empire, and one after it. The practice of a long line of bishops, 
culminating in Saint Ambrose, supplied the basis for Saint Augustine's political philosophy. Then 
came the barbarian invasion, followed by a long time of confusion and increasing ignorance. 
Between Boethius and Saint Anselm, a period of over five centuries, there is only one eminent 
philosopher, John the Scot, and he, as an Irishman, had largely escaped the various processes that 
were moulding the rest of the Western world. But this period, in spite of the absence of 
philosophers, was not one during which there was no intellectual development. Chaos raised 
urgent practical problems, which were dealt with by means of institutions and modes of thought 
that dominated scholastic philosophy, and are, to a great extent, still important at the present day. 
These institutions and modes of thought were not introduced to the world by theorists, but by 
practical men in the stress of conflict. The moral reform of the Church in the eleventh century, 
which was the immediate prelude to the scholastic philosophy, was a reaction against the 
increasing absorption of the Church into the feudal system. To understand the scholastics we must 
understand Hildebrand, and to understand Hildebrand we must know something of the evils 
against which he contended. Nor can we ignore the foundation of the Holy Roman Empire and its 
effect upon European thought. 

For these reasons, the reader will find in the following pages much ecclesiastical and political 
history of which the relevance to the development of philosophic thought may not be immediately 
evident. It is the more necessary to relate something of this history as the period 

- 306 - 

concemed is obscure, and is unfamiliar to many who are at home with both ancient and modem 
history. Few technical philosophers have had as much influence on philosophic thought as Saint 
Ambrose, Charlemagne, and Hildebrand. To relate what is essential concerning these men and 
their times is therefore indispensable in any adequate treatment of our subject. 

- 307 - 

Part I. The Fathers 

CHAPTER I The Religious Development of the Jews 

THE Christian religion, as it was handed over by the late Roman Empire to the barbarians, 
consisted of three elements: first, certain philosophical beliefs, derived mainly from Plato and 
the Neoplatonists, but also in part from the Stoics; second, a conception of morals and history 
derived from the Jews; and thirdly, certain theories, more especially as to salvation, which were 
on the whole new in Christianity, though in part traceable to Orphism, and to kindred cults of 
the Near East.The most important Jewish elements in Christianity appear to me to be the 
following: 

1 . A sacred history, beginning with the Creation, leading to a consummation in the future, 

and justifying the ways of God to man. 



2. The existence of a small section of mankind whom God specially loves. For Jews, this 
section was the Chosen People; for Christians, the elect. 

3. A new conception of "righteousness." The virtue of almsgiving, for example, was taken 
over by Christianity from later Judaism. The importance attached to baptism might be 
derived from Orphism or from oriental pagan mystery religions, but practical 
philanthropy, as an element in the Christian conception of virtue, seems to have come 
from the Jews. 

-308- 

4. The Law. Christians kept part of the Hebrew Law, for instance the Decalogue, while they 
rejected its ceremonial and ritual parts. But in practice they attached to the Creed much 
the same feelings that the Jews attached to the Law. This involved the doctrine that 
correct belief is at least as important as virtuous action, a doctrine which is essentially 
Hellenic. What is Jewish in origin is the exclusiveness of the elect. 

5. The Messiah. The Jews believed that the Messiah would bring them temporal prosperity, 
and victory over their enemies here on earth; moreover, he remained in the future. For 
Christians, the Messiah was the historical Jesus, who was also identified with the Logos 
of Greek philosophy; and it was not on earth, but in heaven, that the Messiah was to 
enable his followers to triumph over their enemies. 

6. The Kingdom of Heaven. Other-worldliness is a conception which Jews and Christians, 
in a sense, share with later Platonism, but it takes, with them, a much more concrete 
form than with Greek philosophers. The Greek doctrine— which is to be found in much 
Christian philosophy, but not in popular Christianity— was that the sensible world, in 
space and time, is an illusion, and that, by intellectual and moral discipline, a man can 
learn to live in the eternal world, which alone is real. The Jewish and Christian doctrine, 
on the other hand, conceived the Other World as not metaphysically different from this 
world, but as in the future, when the virtuous would enjoy everlasting bliss and the 
wicked would suffer everlasting torment. This belief embodied revenge psychology, and 
was intelligible to all and sundry, as the doctrines of Greek philosophers were not. 

To understand the origin of these beliefs, we must take account of certain facts in Jewish 
history, to which we will now turn our attention. 

The early history of the Israelites cannot be confirmed from any source outside the Old 
Testament, and it is impossible to know at what point it ceases to be purely legendary. David 
and Solomon may be accepted as kings who probably had a real existence, but at the earliest 
point at which we come to something certainly historical there are already the two kingdoms of 
Israel and Judah. The first person mentioned in the Old Testament of whom there is an 
independent record is Ahab, King of Israel, who is spoken of in an Assyrian let- 


- 309 - 



ter of 853 B.C. The Assyrians finally conquered the Northern kingdom in 722 B.C., and 
removed a great part of the population. After this time, the kingdom of Judah alone preserved 
the Israelite religion and tradition. The kingdom of Judah just survived the Assyrians, whose 
power came to an end with the capture of Nineveh by the Babylonians and Medes in 606 B.C. 
But in 586 B.C. Nebuchadrezzar captured Jerusalem, destroyed the Temple, and removed a 
large part of the population to Babylon. The Babylonian kingdom fell in 538 B.C., when 
Babylon was taken by Cyrus, king of the Medes and Persians. Cyrus, in 537 B.C., issued an 
edict allowing the Jews to return to Palestine. Many of them did so, under the leadership of 
Nehemiah and Ezra; the Temple was rebuilt, and Jewish orthodoxy began to be crystallized. 

In the period of the captivity, and for some time before and after this period, Jewish religion 
went through a very important development. Originally, there appears to have been not very 
much difference, from a religious point of view, between the Israelites and surrounding tribes. 
Yahweh was, at first, only a tribal god who favoured the children of Israel, but it was not denied 
that there were other gods, and their worship was habitual. When the first Commandment says, 
"Thou shalt have none other gods but me," it is saying something which was an innovation in 
the time immediately preceding the captivity. This is made evident by various texts in the 
earlier prophets. It was the prophets at this time who first taught that the worship of heathen 
gods was sin. To win the victory in the constant wars of that time, they proclaimed, the favour 
of Yahweh was essential; and Yahweh would withdraw his favour if other gods were also 
honoured. Jeremiah and Ezekiel, especially, seem to have invented the idea that all religions 
except one are false, and that the Lord punishes idolatry. 

Some quotations will illustrate their teachings, and the prevalence of the heathen practices 
against which they protested. "Seest Thou not what they do in the cities of Judah and in the 
streets of Jerusalem? The children gather wood, and the fathers kindle the fire, and the women 
knead their dough, to make cakes to the queen of heaven [Ishtar], and to pour out drink 
offerings unto other gods, that they may provoke me to anger." jlThe Lord is angry about it. 
"And they 


* Jeremiah VII, 17-18. 


- 310 - 


have built the high places of Tophet, which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their 
sons and their daughters in the fire; which I commanded them not, neither came it into my 
heart." 

There is a very interesting passage in Jeremiah in which he denounces the Jews in Egypt for 
their idolatry. He himself had lived among them for a time. The prophet tells the Jewish 
refugees in Egypt that Yahweh will destroy them all because their wives have burnt incense to 
other gods. But they refuse to listen to him, saying: "We will certainly do whatsoever thing 
goeth forth out of our own mouth, to bum incense unto the queen of heaven, and to pour out 
drink offerings unto her, as we have done, we and our fathers, our kings and our princes, in the 
cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem; for then had we plenty of victuals, and were 
well, and saw no evil." But Jeremiah assures them that Yahweh noticed these idolatrous 
practices, and that misfortune has come because of them. "Behold, I have sworn by my great 
name, saith the Lord, that my name shall no more be named in the mouth of any man of Judah 
in all the land of Egypt. ... I will watch over them for evil, and not for good; and all the men of 
Judah that are in the land of Egypt shall be consumed by the sword and by the famine, until 

there be an end of them." 

Ezekiel is equally shocked by the idolatrous practices of the Jews. The Lord in a vision shows 
him women at the north gate of the temple weeping for Tammuz (a Babylonian deity); then He 
shows him "greater abominations," five and twenty men at the door of the Temple worshipping 
the sun. The Lord declares: "Therefore will I also deal in fury: mine eye shall not spare, neither 
will I have pity: and though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice, yet will I not hear them." 
a€]_ 

The idea that all religions but one are wicked, and that the Lord punishes idolatry, was 
apparently invented by these prophets. The prophets, on the whole, were fiercely nationalistic, 
and looked forward to the day when the Lord would utterly destroy the gentiles. 

The captivity was taken to justify the denunciations of the prophets. If Yahweh was all- 
powerful, and the Jews were his Chosen People, their sufferings could only be explained by 
their wickedness. The psychology is that of paternal correction: the Jews are to be purified by 
punishment. Under the influence of this belief, they developed, in 


* Ibid., VII, 31. 
a 

g Jeremiah XLIV, 11 -end. 
a 

€ Ezekiel VIII, 11 -end. 
i 


- 311 - 


exile, an orthodoxy much more rigid and much more nationally exclusive than that which had 
prevailed while they were independent. The Jews who remained behind and were not 
transplanted to Babylon did not undergo this development to anything like the same extent. 
When Ezra and Nehemiah came back to Jerusalem after the captivity, they were shocked to find 
that mixed marriages had been common, and they dissolved all such marriages. 

The Jews were distinguished from the other nations of antiquity by their stubborn national 
pride. All the others, when conquered, acquiesced inwardly as well as outwardly; the Jews 
alone retained the belief in their own pre-eminence, and the conviction that their misfortunes 
were due to God's anger, because they had failed to preserve the purity of their faith and ritual. 
The historical books of the Old Testament, which were mostly compiled after the captivity, give 
a misleading impression, since they suggest that the idolatrous practices against which the 
prophets protested were a falling-off from earlier strictness, whereas in fact the earlier strictness 
had never existed. The prophets were innovators to a much greater extent than appears in the 
Bible when read unhistorically. 

Some things which were afterwards characteristic of Jewish religion were developed, though in 
part from previously existing sources, during the captivity. Owing to the destruction of the 
Temple, where alone sacrifices could be offered, the Jewish ritual perforce became non- 
sacrificial. Synagogues began at this time, with readings from such portions of the Scriptures as 
already existed. The importance of the Sabbath was first emphasized at this time, and so was 
circumcision as the mark of the Jew. As we have already seen, it was only during the exile that 
marriage with gentiles came to be forbidden. There was a growth of every form of 

exclusiveness. "I am the Lord your God, which have separated you from other people." —"Ye 
shall be holy, for I the Lord your God am holy." a€j The Law is a product of this period. It was 
one of the chief forces in preserving national unity. 

What we have as the Book of Isaiah is the work of two different prophets, one before the exile 
and one after. The second of these, who is called by Biblical students Deutero-Isaiah, is the 
most remarkable of the prophets. He is the first who reports the Lord as saying "There is no god 
but I." He believes in the resurrection of the body, perhaps 


* Ezra IX-X, 5. 
a 

^ Leviticus XX, 24. 
a 

€ Ibid., XIX, 2. 
i 


- 312 - 


as a result of Persian influence. His prophecies of the Messiah were, later, the chief Old 
Testament texts used to show that the prophets foresaw the coming of Christ. 

In Christian arguments with both pagans and Jews, these texts from Deutero-Isaiah played a 
very important part, and for this reason I shall quote the most important of them. All nations are 
to be converted in the end: "They shall beat their swords into ploughshares, and their spears into 
pruning-hooks: nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they leam war any 
more" ( Is. II, 4). "Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name 
Immanuel." ^_(As to this text, there was a controversy between Jews and Christians; the Jews 
said that the correct translation is "a young woman shall conceive," but the Christians thought 
the Jews were lying.) "The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light; they that 
dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the light shined. ... For unto us a 
child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his 
name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince 

of Peace." 2£-The most apparently prophetic of these passages is the fifty-third chapter, which 
contains the familiar texts: "He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and 
acquainted with grief. . . . Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows. . . . But he 
was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our 
peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed. ... He was oppressed, and he was 
afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep 
before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth." The inclusion of the gentiles in the 
ultimate salvation is explicit: "And the gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the 
brightness of thy rising." a€j 

After Ezra and Nehemiah, the Jews for a while disappear from history. The Jewish state 
survived as a theocracy, but its territory was very small— only the region of ten to fifteen miles 
around Jerusalem, according to E. Bevan. A$ A fter Alexander, it became a disputed territory 
between the Ptolemies and the Seleucids. This, however, seldom 


* Isaiah VII, 14. 

A 

§ Jerusalem under the High Priests, p. 12. 

* Ibid., LX, 3. 
a 

€ Ibid., IX, 2, 6. 
i 


- 313 - 


involved fighting in actual Jewish territory, and left the Jews, for a long time, to the free 
exercise of their religion. 

Their moral maxims, at this time, are set forth in Ecclesiasticus, probably written about 200 
B.C. Until recently, this book was only kn own in a Greek version; this is the reason for its being 
banished to the Apocrypha. But a Hebrew manuscript has lately been discovered, in some 
respects different from the Greek text translated in our version of the Apocrypha. The morality 
taught is very mundane. Reputation among neighbours is highly prized. Honesty is the best 
policy, because it is useful to have Yahweh on your side. Almsgiving is recommended. The 
only sign of Greek influence is in the praise of medicine. 

Slaves must not be treated too kindly. "Fodder, a wand, and burdens, are for the ass: and bread, 
correction, and work, for a servant. . . . Set him to work, as is fit for him: if he be not obedient, 
put on more heavy fetters" (XXIII, 24, 28). At the same time, remember that you have paid a 
price for him, and that if he runs away you will lose your money; this sets a limit to profitable 
severity ( ibid.. 30, 31 ). Daughters are a great source of anxiety; apparently in his day they were 
much addicted to immorality (XLII, 9-1 1). He has a low opinion of women: "From gannents 
cometh a moth, and from women wickedness" ( ibid.. 13 I. It is a mistake to be cheerful with 
your children; the right course is to "bow down their neck from their youth" (VII, 23, 24). 

Altogether, like the elder Cato, he represents the morality of the virtuous business man in a very 
unattractive light. 

This tranquil existence of comfortable self-righteousness was rudely interrupted by the Seleucid 
king Antiochus IV, who was determined to hellenize all his dominions. In 175 B.C. he 
established a gymnasium in Jerusalem, and taught young men to wear Greek hats and practise 
athletics. In this he was helped by a hellenizing Jew named Jason, whom he made high priest. 
The priestly aristocracy had become lax, and had felt the attraction of Greek civilization; but 
they were vehemently opposed by a party called the "Hasidim" (meaning "Holy"), who were 
strong among the rural population. ^_When, in 170 B.C., 


* From them, probably, developed the sect of the Essenes, whose doctrines seem to have 
influenced primitive Christianity. See Oesterley and Robinson , History of Israel, Vol. II, 
p. 323 ff. The Pharisees also descended from them. 


- 314 - 


Antiochus became involved in war with Egypt, the Jews rebelled. Thereupon Antiochus took 
the holy vessels from the Temple, and placed in it the image of the God. He identified Yahweh 
with Zeus, following a practice which had been successful everywhere else. ^_He resolved to 
extirpate the Jewish religion, and to stop circumcision and the observance of the laws relating to 
food. To all this Jerusalem submitted, but outside Jerusalem the Jews resisted with the utmost 
stubbornness. 

The history of this period is told in the First Book of Maccabees. The first chapter tells how 
Antiochus decreed that all the inhabitants of his kingdom should be one people, and abandon 
their separate laws. All the heathen obeyed, and many of the Israelites, although the king 
commanded that they should profane the sabbath, sacrifice swine's flesh, and leave their 
children uncircumcised. All who disobeyed were to suffer death. Many, nevertheless, resisted. 
"They put to death certain women, that had caused their children to be circumcised. And they 
hanged the infants about their necks, and rifled their houses, and slew them that had 
circumcised them. Howbeit many in Israel were fully resolved and confirmed in themselves not 
to eat any unclean thing. Wherefore they chose rather to die, that they might not be defiled with 

meats, and that they might not profane the holy covenant: so then they died." — 

It was at this time that the doctrine of immortality came to be widely believed among the Jews. 

It had been thought that virtue would be rewarded here on earth; but persecution, which fell 
upon the most virtuous, made it evident that this was not the case. In order to safeguard divine 
justice, therefore, it was necessary to believe in rewards and punishments hereafter. This 
doctrine was not universally accepted among the Jews; in the time of Christ, the Sadducees still 
rejected it. But by that time they were a small party, and in later times all Jews believed in 
immortality. 

The revolt against Antiochus was led by Judas MaccabAjus, an able military commander, who 
first recaptured Jerusalem ( 164 B.C.), and then embarked upon aggression. Sometimes he 
killed all the males, sometimes he circumcised them by force. His brother Jonathan was 


* Some Alexandrian Jews did not object to this identification. See Letter of Aristeas, 15, 16. 
a 

c I Maccabees I, 60-63. 


- 315 - 


made high priest, was allowed to occupy Jerusalem with a garrison, and conquered part of 
Samaria, acquiring Joppa and Akra. He negotiated with Rome, and was successful in securing 
complete autonomy. His family were high priests until Herod, and are known as the Hasmonean 
dynasts. 

In enduring and resisting persecution the Jews of this time showed immense heroism, although 
in defence of things that do not strike us as important, such as circumcision and the wickedness 
of eating pork. 

The time of the persecution by Antiochus IV was crucial in Jewish history. The Jews of the 
Dispersion were, at this time, becoming more and more hellenized; the Jews of Judea were few; 
and even among them the rich and powerful were inclined to acquiesce in Greek innovations. 
But for the heroic resistance of the Hasidim, the Jewish religion might easily have died out. If 
this had happened, neither Christianity nor Islam could have existed in anything like the form 
they actually took. Townsend, in his Introduction to the translation of the Fourth Book of 
Maccabees, says: 

"It has been finely said that if Judaism as a religion had perished under Antiochus, the seed-bed 
of Christianity would have been lacking; and thus the blood of the Maccabean martyrs, who 
saved Judaism, ultimately became the seed of the Church. Therefore as not only Christendom 
but also Islam derive their monotheism from a Jewish source, it may well be that the world 
today owes the very existence of monotheism both in the East and in the West to the 
Maccabees." V 

The Maccabees themselves, however, were not admired by later Jews, because their family, as 
high priests, adopted, after their successes, a worldly and temporizing policy. Admiration was 
for the martyrs. The Fourth Book of Maccabees, written probably in Alexandria about the time 
of Christ, illustrates this as well as some other interesting points. In spite of its title, it nowhere 
mentions the Maccabees, but relates the amazing fortitude, first of an old man, and then of 
seven young brothers, all of whom were first tortured and then burnt by Antiochus, while their 
mother, who was present, exhorted them to stand firm. The king, at first, tried to win them by 
friendliness, telling them that, if they would only consent to eat pork, he would take them into 
his favour, and secure successful careers for 


* The Apocrypha and Pseudepigrapha of the Old Testament in English. Edited by R. H. 
Charles. Vol. II, p. 659. 


- 316 - 


them. When they refused, he showed them the instruments of torture. But they remained 
unshakable, telling him that he would suffer eternal torment after death, while they would 
inherit everlasting bliss. One by one, in each other's presence, and in that of their mother, they 
were first exhorted to eat pork, then, when they refused, tortured and killed. At the end, the king 
turned round to his soldiers and told them he hoped they would profit by such an example of 
courage. The account is of course embellished by legend, but it is historically true that the 
persecution was severe and was endured heroically; also that the main points at issue were 
circumcision and eating pork. 

This book is interesting in another respect. Although the writer is obviously an orthodox Jew, 
he uses the language of the Stoic philosophy, and is concerned to prove that the Jews live most 
completely in accordance with its precepts. The book opens with the sentence: 

"Philosophical in the highest degree is the question I propose to discuss, namely whether the 
Inspired Reason is supreme ruler over the passions; and to the philosophy of it I would seriously 
entreat your earnest attention." 

Alexandrian Jews were willing, in philosophy, to leam from the Greeks, but they adhered with 
extraordinary tenacity to the Law, especially circumcision, observance of the Sabbath, and 
abstinence from pork and other unclean meats. From the time of Nehemiah till after the fall of 
Jerusalem in A.D. 70, the importance that they attached to the Law steadily increased. They no 
longer tolerated prophets who had anything new to say. Those among them who felt impelled to 
write in the style of the prophets pretended that they had discovered an old book, by Daniel or 
Solomon or some other ancient of impeccable respectability. Their ritual peculiarities held them 
together as a nation, but emphasis on the Law gradually destroyed originality and made them 
intensely conservative. This rigidity makes the revolt of Saint Paul against the domination of 
the Law very remarkable. 

The New Testament, however, is not such a completely new beginning as it is apt to seem to 
those who know nothing of Jewish literature in the times just before the birth of Christ. 
Prophetic fervour was by no means dead, though it had to adopt the device of pseudonymity in 
order to obtain a hearing. Of the greatest interest, in this respect, is the Book of Enoch, ^_a 
composite work, due to various authors, the 


* For the text of this book, in English, see Charles, op. cit., whose introduction also is 
valuable. 


- 317 - 


earliest being slightly before the time of the Maccabees, and the latest about 64 B.C. Most of it 
professes to relate apocalyptic visions of the patriarch Enoch. It is very important for the side of 
Judaism which turned to Christianity. The New Testament writers are familiar with it; Saint Jude 
considers it to be actually by Enoch. Early Christian Fathers, for instance Clement of Alexandria 
and Tertullian, treated it as canonical, but Jerome and Augustine rejected it. It fell, consequently, 
into oblivion, and was lost until, early in the nineteenth century, three manuscripts of it, in 
Ethiopic, were found in Abyssinia. Since then, manuscripts of parts of it have been found in Greek 
and Latin versions. It appears to have been originally written partly in Hebrew, partly in Aramaic. 

Its authors were members of the Hasidim, and their successors the Pharisees. It denounces kings 
and princes, meaning the Hasmonean dynasty and the Sadducees. It influenced New Testament 
doctrine, particularly as regards the Messiah, Sheol (hell), and demonology. 

The book consists mainly of "parables," which are more cosmic than those of the New Testament. 
There are visions of heaven and hell, of the Last Judgement, and so on; one is reminded of the 
first two Books of Paradise Lost where the literary quality is good, and of Blake Prophetic Books 
where it is inferior. 

There is an expansion of Genesis VI, 2, 4, which is curious and Promethean. The angels taught 
men metallurgy, and were punished for revealing "eternal secrets." They were also cannibals. The 
angels that had sinned became pagan gods, and their women became sirens; but at the last, they 
were punished with everlasting torments. 

There are descriptions of heaven and hell which have considerable literary merit. The Last 
Judgement is performed by "the Son of Man, who hath righteousness" and who sits on the throne 
of His glory. Some of the gentiles, at the last, will repent and be forgiven; but most gentiles, and 
all hellenizing Jews, will suffer eternal damnation, for the righteous will pray for vengeance, and 
their prayer will be granted. 

There is a section on astronomy, where we learn that the sun and moon have chariots driven by the 
wind, that the year consists of 364 days, that human sin causes the heavenly bodies to depart from 
their courses, and that only the virtuous can know astronomy. Falling stars are falling angels, and 
are punished by the seven archangels. 

Next comes sacred history. Up to the Maccabees, this pursues the 


- 318 - 



course known from the Bible in its earlier portions, and from history in the later parts. Then the 
author goes on into the future: the New Jerusalem, the conversion of the remnant of the gentiles, 
the resurrection of the righteous, and the Messiah. 

There is a great deal about the punishment of sinners and the reward of the righteous, who never 
display an attitude of Christian forgiveness towards sinners. "What will ye do, ye sinners, and 
whither will ye flee on that day of judgement, when ye hear the voice of the prayer of the 
righteous?" "Sin has not been sent upon the earth, but man of himself has created it." Sins are 
recorded in heaven. "Ye sinners shall be cursed for ever, and ye shall have no peace." Sinners may 
be happy all their lives, and even in dying, but their souls descend into Sheol, where they shall 
suffer "darkness and chains and a burning flame." But as for the righteous, "I and my Son will be 
united with them for ever." 

The last words of the book are: "To the faithful he will give faithfulness in the habitation of 
upright paths. And they shall see those who were bom in darkness led into darkness, while the 
righteous shall be resplendent. And the sinners shall cry aloud and see them resplendent, and they 
indeed will go where days and seasons are prescribed for them." 

Jews, like Christians, thought much about sin, but few of them thought of themselves as sinners. 
This was, in the main, a Christian innovation, introduced by the parable of the Pharisee and the 
publican, and taught as a virtue in Christ's denunciations of the Scribes and Pharisees. The 
Christians endeavoured to practise Christian humility; the Jews, in general, did not. 

There are, however, important exceptions among orthodox Jews just before the time of Christ. 
Take, for instance, "The Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, " written between 109 and 107 B.C. 
by a Pharisee who admired John Hyrcanus, a high priest of the Hasmonean dynasty. This book, in 
the form in which we have it, contains Christian interpolations, but these are all concerned with 
dogma. When they are excised, the ethical teaching remains closely similar to that of the Gospels. 
As the Rev. Dr. R. H. Charles says: "The Sennon on the Mount reflects in several instances the 
spirit and even reproduces the very phrases of our text: many passages in the Gospels exhibit 
traces of the same, and St. Paul seems to have used the book as a vade 


- 319 - 



mecum" {op. cit., pp. 291-2). We find in this book such precepts as the following: 

"Love ye one another from the heart; and if a man sin against thee, speak peaceably to him, and in 
thy soul hold not guile; and if he repent and confess, forgive him. But if he deny it, do not get into 
a passion with him, lest catching the poison from thee he take to swear, ing, and so then sin 
doubly. . . . And if he be shameless and persist in wrong-doing, even so forgive him from the 
heart, and leave to God the avenging." 

Dr. Charles is of opinion that Christ must have been acquainted with this passage. Again we find: 
"Love the Lord and your neighbour." 

"Love the Lord through all your life, and one another with a true heart." 

"I loved the Lord; likewise also every man with all my heart." These are to be compared with 
Matthew XXII, 37-39. There is a reprobation of all hatred in "The Testaments of the Twelve 
Patriarchs”', for instance: 

"Anger is blindness, and does not suffer one to see the face of any man with truth." 

"Hatred, therefore, is evil; for it constantly mateth with lying." The author of this book, as might 
be expected, holds that not only the Jews, but all the gentiles, will be saved. 

Christians have leamt from the Gospels to think ill of Pharisees, yet the author of this book was a 
Pharisee, and he taught, as we have seen, those very ethical maxims which we think of as most 
distinctive of Christ's preaching. The explanation, however, is not difficult. In the first place, he 
must have been, even in his own day, an exceptional Pharisee; the more usual doctrine was, no 
doubt, that of the Book of Enoch. In the second place, we know that all movements tend to ossify; 
who could infer the principles of Jefferson from those of the D.A.R.? In the third place, we know, 
as regards the Pharisees in particular, that their devotion to the Law, as the absolute and final 
truth, soon put an end to all fresh and living thought and feeling among them. As Dr. Charles says: 

"When Pharisaism, breaking with the ancient ideals of its party, committed itself to political 
interests and movements, and concurrently therewith surrendered itself more and more wholly to 
the study 


- 320 - 



of the letter of the Law, it soon ceased to offer scope for the development of such a lofty system of 
ethics as the Testaments [of the Patriarchs] attest, and so the true successors of the early Hasids 
and their teaching quitted Judaism and found their natural home in the bosom of primitive 
Christianity." 

After a period of rule by the High Priests, Mark Antony made his friend Herod King of the Jews. 
Herod was a gay adventurer, often on the verge of bankruptcy, accustomed to Roman society, and 
very far removed from Jewish piety. His wife was of the family of the High Priests, but he was an 
IdumAjan, which alone would suffice to make him an object of suspicion to the Jews. He was a 
skilful timeserver, and deserted Antony promptly when it became evident that Octavius was going 
to be victorious. However, he made strenuous attempts to reconcile the Jews to his rule. He rebuilt 
the Temple, though in a hellenistic style, with rows of Corinthian pillars; but he placed over the 
main gate a large golden eagle, thereby infringing the second Commandment. When it was 
rumoured that he was dying, the Pharisees pulled down the eagle, but he, in revenge, caused a 
number of them to be put to death. He died in 4 B.C., and soon after his death the Romans 
abolished the kingship, putting Judea under a procurator. Pontius Pilate, who became procurator 
in A.D. 26, was tactless, and was soon retired. 

In A.D. 66, the Jews, led by the party of the Zealots, rebelled against Rome. They were defeated, 
and Jerusalem was captured in A.D. 70. The Temple was destroyed, and few Jews were left in 
Judea. 

The Jews of the Dispersion had become important centuries before this time. The Jews had been 
originally an almost wholly agricultural people, but they leamt trading from the Babylonians 
during the captivity. Many of them remained in Babylon after the time of Ezra and Nehemiah, and 
among these some were very rich. After the foundation of Alexandria, great numbers of Jews 
settled in that city; they had a special quarter assigned to them, not as a ghetto, but to keep them 
from danger of pollution by contact with gentiles. The Alexandrian Jews became much more 
hellenized than those of Judea, and forgot Hebrew. For this reason it became necessary to translate 
the Old Testament into Greek; the result was the Septuagint. The Pentateuch was translated in the 
middle of the third century B.C.; the other parts somewhat later. 


- 321 - 



Legends arose about the Septuagint, so called because it was the work of seventy translators. It 
was said that each of the seventy translated the whole independently, and that when the versions 
were compared they were found to be identical down to the smallest detail, having all been 
divinely inspired. Nevertheless, later scholarship showed that the Septuagint was gravely 
defective. The Jews, after the rise of Christianity, made little use of it, but reverted to reading the 
Old Testament in Hebrew. The early Christians, on the contrary, few of whom knew Hebrew, 
depended upon the Septuagint, or upon translations from it into Latin. A better text was produced 
by the labours of Origen in the third century, but those who only knew Latin had very defective 
versions until Jerome, in the fifth century, produced the Vulgate. This was, at first, received with 
much criticism, because he had been helped by Jews in establishing the text, and many Christians 
thought that Jews had deliberately falsified the prophets in order that they should not seem to 
foretell Christ. Gradually, however, the work of Saint Jerome was accepted, and it remains to this 
day authoritative in the Catholic Church. 

The philosopher Philo, who was a contemporary of Christ, is the best illustration of Greek 
influence on the Jews in the sphere of thought. While orthodox in religion, Philo is, in philosophy, 
primarily a Platonist; other important influences are those of the Stoics and Neopythagoreans. 
While his influence among the Jews ceased after the fall of Jerusalem, the Christian Fathers found 
that he had shown the way to reconcile Greek philosophy with acceptance of the Hebrew 
Scriptures. 

In every important city of antiquity there came to be considerable colonies of Jews, who shared 
with the representatives of other Eastern religions an influence upon those who were not content 
either with scepticism or with the official religions of Greece and Rome. Many converts were 
made to Judaism, not only in the Empire, but also in South Russia. It was probably to Jewish and 
semi-Jewish circles that Christianity first appealed. Orthodox Judaism, however, became more 
orthodox and more narrow after the fall of Jerusalem, just as it had done after the earlier fall due 
to Nebuchadrezzar. After the first century, Christianity also crystallized, and the relations of 
Judaism and Christianity were wholly hostile and external; as we shall see, Christianity 
powerfully stimulated anti-Semitism. Throughout the Middle 

-322- 

Ages, Jews had no part in the culture of Christian countries, and were too severely persecuted to 
be able to make contributions to civilization, beyond supplying capital for the building of 
cathedrals and such enterprises. It was only among the Mohammedans, at that period, that Jews 
were treated humanely, and were able to pursue philosophy and enlightened speculation. 

Throughout the Middle Ages, the Mohammedans were more civilized and more humane than the 
Christians. Christians persecuted Jews, especially at times of religious excitement; the Crusades 
were associated with appalling pogroms. In Mohammedan countries, on the contrary, Jews were 
not in any way ill treated. Especially in Moorish Spain, they contributed to learning; Maimonides ( 
1 135-1204), who was born at Cordova, is regarded by some as the source of much of Spinoza's 
philosophy. When the Christians reconquered Spain, it was largely the Jews who transmitted to 
them the learning of the Moors. Learned Jews, who knew Hebrew, Greek, and Arabic, and were 
acquainted with the philosophy of Aristotle, transmitted their knowledge to less learned 
schoolmen. They transmitted also less desirable things, such as alchemy and astrology. 

After the Middle Ages, the Jews still contributed largely to civilization as individuals, but no 
longer as a race. 


- 323 - 



CHAPTER II Christianity During the First Four Centuries 


CHRISTIANITY, at first, was preached by Jews to Jews, as a reformed Judaism. Saint James, and 
to a lesser extent Saint Peter, wished it to remain no more than this, and they might have prevailed 
but for Saint Paul, who was detennined to admit gentiles without demanding circumcision or 
submission to the Mosaic Law. The contention between the two factions is related in the Acts of 
the Apostles, from a Pauline point of view. The communities of Christians that Saint Paul 
established in many places were, no doubt, composed partly of converts from among the Jews, 
partly of gentiles seeking a new religion. The certainties of Judaism made it attractive in that age 
of dissolving faiths, but circumcision was an obstacle to the conversion of men. The ritual laws in 
regard to food were also inconvenient. These two obstacles, even if there had been no others, 
would have made it almost impossible for the Hebrew religion to become universal. Christianity, 
owing to Saint Paul, retained what was attractive in the doctrines of the Jews, without the features 
that gentiles found hardest to assimilate. 

The view that the Jews were the Chosen People remained, however, obnoxious to Greek pride. 
This view was radically rejected by the Gnostics. They, or at least some of them, held that the 
sensible world had been created by an inferior deity named Ialdabaoth, the rebellious son of 
Sophia (heavenly wisdom). He, they said, is the Yahweh of the Old Testament, while the serpent, 
so far from being wicked, was engaged in warning Eve against his deceptions. For a long time, the 
supreme deity allowed Ialdabaoth free play; at last He sent His Son to inhabit temporarily the 
body of the man Jesus, and to lib- 


- 324 - 



erate the world from the false teaching of Moses. Those who held this view combined it, as a 
rule, with a Platonic philosophy; Plotinus, as we saw, found some difficulty in refuting it. 
Gnosticism afforded a half-way house between philosophic paganism and Christianity, for, 
while it honoured Christ, it thought ill of the Jews. The same was true, later, of ManichAjsm, 
through which Saint Augustine came to the Catholic Faith. ManichaAjsm combined Christian 
and Zoroastrian elements, teaching that evil is a positive principle, embodied in matter, while 
the good principle is embodied in spirit. It condemned meateating, and all sex, even in 
marriage. Such intermediate doctrines helped much in the gradual conversion of cultivated men 
of Greek speech; but the New Testament warns true believers against them: "O Timothy, keep 
that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding profane and vain babblings, and oppositions of 
science [Gnosis] falsely so called: which some professing have erred concerning the faith." 

Gnostics and ManichAjans continued to flourish until the government became Christian. After 
that time they were led to conceal their beliefs, but they still had a subterranean influence. One 
of the doctrines of a certain sect of Gnostics was adopted by Mahomet. They taught that Jesus 
was a mere man, and that the Son of God descended upon him at the baptism, and abandoned 
him at the time of the Passion. In support of this view they appealed to the text: "My God, my 

God, why hast thou forsaken me?" — — a text which, it must be confessed, Christians have 
always found difficult. The Gnostics considered it unworthy of the Son of God to be bom, to be 
an infant, and, above all, to die on the cross; they said that these things had befallen the man 
Jesus, but not the divine Son of God. Mahomet, who recognized Jesus as a prophet, though not 
as divine, had a strong class feeling that prophets ought not to come to a bad end. He therefore 
adopted the view of the Docetics (a Gnostic sect), according to which it was a mere phantom 
that hung upon the cross, upon which, impotently and ignorantly, Jews and Romans wreaked 
their ineffectual vengeance. In this way, something of Gnosticism passed over into the orthodox 
doctrine of Islam. 

The attitude of Christians to contemporary Jews early became hostile. The received view was 
that God had spoken to the patriarchs 


* I Timothy VI, 20, 2 1 . 


* Mark XXV, 34. 


- 325 - 


and prophets, who were holy men, and had foretold the coming of Christ; but when Christ 
came, the Jews failed to recognize Him, and were thenceforth to be accounted wicked. 
Moreover Christ had abrogated the Mosaic Law, substituting the two commandments to love 
God and our neighbour; this, also, the Jews perversely failed to recognize. As soon as the State 
became Christian, anti-Semitism, in its medieval form, began, nominally as a manifestation of 
Christian zeal. How far the economic motives, by which it was inflamed in later times, operated 
in the Christian Empire, it seems impossible to ascertain. 

In proportion as Christianity became hellenized, it became theological. Jewish theology was 
always simple. Yahweh developed from a tribal deity into the sole omnipotent God who created 
heaven and earth; divine justice, when it was seen not to confer earthly prosperity upon the 
virtuous, was transferred to heaven, which entailed belief in immortality. But throughout its 
evolution the Jewish creed involved nothing complicated and metaphysical; it had no mysteries, 
and every Jew could understand it. 

This Jewish simplicity, on the whole, still characterizes the synoptic Gospels ( Matthew, Mark, 
and Luke), but has already disappeared in Saint John, where Christ is identified with the 
Platonic-Stoic Logos. It is less Christ the Man than Christ the theological figure that interests 
the fourth evangelist. This is still more true of the Fathers; you will find, in their writings, many 
more allusions to Saint John than to the other three gospels put together. The Pauline epistles 
also contain much theology, especially as regards salvation; at the same time they show a 
considerable acquaintance with Greek culture— a quotation from Menander, an allusion to 
Epimenides the Cretan who said that all Cretans are liars, and so on. Nevertheless Saint Paul * 
says: "Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit." 

The synthesis of Greek philosophy and Hebrew scriptures remained more or less haphazard and 
fragmentary until the time of Origen ( A.D. 185-254). Origen, like Philo, lived in Alexandria, 
which, owing to commerce and the university, was, from its foundation to its fall, the chief 
centre of learned syncretism. Like his contemporary Plotinus, he was a pupil of Ammonius 
Saccas, whom many regard as 


* Or rather the author of an Epistle attributed to Saint Paul— Colossiansll, 8. 

-326- 

the founder of Neoplatonism. His doctrines, as set forth in his work De Principiis, have much 
affinity to those of Plotinus— more, in fact, than is compatible with orthodoxy. There is, Origen 
says, nothing wholly incorporeal except God-Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. The stars are living 
rational beings, to whom God has given souls that were already in existence. The sun, he thinks, 
can sin. The souls of men, as Plato taught, come to them at birth from elsewhere, having existed 
ever since the Creation. Nous and soul are distinguished more or less as in Plotinus. When Nous 
falls away, it becomes soul; soul, when virtuous, becomes Nous. Ultimately all spirits will become 
wholly submissive to Christ, and will then be bodiless. Even the devil will be saved at the 
last. Origen, in spite of being recognized as one of the Fathers, was, in later times, condemned as 
having maintained four heresies: 

1 . The pre-existence of souls, as taught by Plato; 

2. That the human nature of Christ, and not only His divine nature, existed before the 
Incarnation. 

3. That, at the resurrection, our bodies shall be transformed into absolutely ethereal bodies. 


4. 


That all men, and even devils, shall be saved at the last. 


Saint Jerome, who had expressed a somewhat unguarded admiration of Origen for his work in 
establishing the text of the Old Testament, found it prudent, subsequently, to expend much time 
and vehemence in repudiating his theological errors. 

Origen’s aberrations were not only theological; in his youth he was guilty of an irreparable error 
through a too literal interpretation of the text: "There be eunuchs, which have made themselves 
eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake." ^_This method of escaping the temptations of the flesh, 
which Origen rashly adopted, has been condemned by the Church; moreover it made him ineligible 
for holy orders, although some ecclesiastics seem to have thought otherwise, thereby giving rise to 
unedifying controversies. 

Origen’s longest work is a book entitled Against Celsus. Celsus was the author of a book (now 
lost) against Christianity, and Origen set to work to answer him point by point. Celsus begins by 
objecting to 


* Matthew XIX, 12. 


-327- 

Christians because they belong to illegal associations; this Origen does not deny, but claims to 
be a virtue, like tyrannicide. He then comes to what is no doubt the real basis for the dislike of 
Christianity: Christianity, says Celsus, comes from the Jews, who are barbarians; and only 
Greeks can extract sense out of the teachings of barbarians. Origen replies that any one coming 
from Greek philosophy to the Gospels would conclude that they are true, and supply a 
demonstration satisfying to the Greek intellect. But, further, "The Gospel has a demonstration 
of its own, more divine than any established by Grecian dialectics. And this diviner method is 
called by the apostle the 'manifestation of the Spirit and of power; of 'the Spirit,' on account of 
the prophecies, which are sufficient to produce faith in any one who reads them, especially in 
those things which relate to Christ; and of 'power,' because of the signs and wonders which we 
must believe to have been performed, both on many other grounds, and on this, that traces of 
them are still preserved among those who regulate their lives by the precepts of the Gospel." jy 

This passage is interesting, as showing already the twofold argument for belief which is 
characteristic of Christian philosophy. On the one hand, pure reason, rightly exercised, suffices 
to establish the essentials of the Christian faith, more especially God, immortality, and free will. 
But on the other hand the Scriptures prove not only these bare essentials, but much more; and 
the divine inspiration of the Scriptures is proved by the fact that the prophets foretold the 
coming of the Messiah, by the miracles, and by the beneficent effects of belief on the lives of 
the faithful. Some of these arguments are now considered out of date, but the last of them was 
still employed by William James. All of them, until the Renaissance, were accepted by every 
Christian philosopher. 

Some of Origen's arguments are curious. He says that magicians invoke the "God of Abraham," 
often without knowing who He is; but apparently this invocation is specially potent. Names are 
essential in magic; it is not indifferent whether God is called by His Jewish, Egyptian, 
Babylonian, Greek, or Brahman name. Magic formulAj lose their efficacy when translated. One 
is led to suppose that the magicians of the time used formulAj from all known religions, but if 
Origen is 


Origen, Contra Celsum, Bk. I, Ch. II. 


* 


-328- 

right, those derived from Hebrew sources were the most effective. The argument is the more 
curious as he points out that Moses forbade sorcery. 

Christians, we are told, should not take part in the government of the State, but only of the 

"divine nation," i.e., the Church. This doctrine, of course, was somewhat modified after the 
time of Constantine, but something of it survived. It is implicit in Saint Augustine's City of 
God. It led churchmen, at the time of the fall of the Western Empire, to look on passively at 
secular disasters, while they exercised their very great talents in Church discipline, theological 
controversy, and the spread of monasticism. Some trace of it still exists: most people regard 
politics as "worldly" and unworthy of any really holy man. 

Church government developed slowly during the first three centuries, and rapidly after the 
conversion of Constantine. Bishops were popularly elected; gradually they acquired 
considerable power over Christians in their own dioceses, but before Constantine there was 
hardly any fonn of central government over the whole Church. The power of bishops in great 
cities was enhanced by the practice of almsgiving: the offerings of the faithful were 
administered by the bishop, who could give or withhold charity to the poor. There came thus to 
be a mob of the destitute, ready to do the bishop's will. When the State became Christian, the 
bishops were given judicial and administrative functions. There came also to be a central 
government, at least in matters of doctrine. Constantine was annoyed by the quarrel between 
Catholics and Arians; having thrown in his lot with the Christians, he wanted them to be a 
united party. For the purpose of healing dissensions, he caused the convening of the 
oecumenical Council of NicAja, which drew up the Nicene Creed, a€j and, so far as the Arian 
controversy was concerned, detennined for an time the standard of orthodoxy. Other later 
controversies were similarly decided by oecumenical councils, until the division between East 
and West and the Eastern refusal to admit the authority of the Pope made them impossible. 

The Pope, though officially the most important individual in the 


* Origen, op. cit., Bk. I, Ch. XXVI. 

* Ibid., Bk. VIII, Ch. LXXV. 
a 

€ Not exactly in its present form, which was decided upon in 362. 
i 


-329- 

Church, had no authority over the Church as a whole until a much later period. The gradual growth 
of the papal power is a very interesting subject, which I shall deal with in later chapters. The 
growth of Christianity before Constantine, as well as the motives of his conversion, have been 
variously explained by various authors. Gibbon ^assigns five causes: 


" 1 . The inflexible, and, if we may use the expression, the intolerant zeal of the 
Christians, derived, it is true, from the Jewish religion, but purified from the narrow and 
unsocial spirit which, instead of inviting, had deterred the Gentiles from embracing the 
law of Moses. 

"2. The doctrine of a future life, improved by every additional circumstance which could 
give weight and efficacy to that important truth. 

"3. The miraculous powers ascribed to the primitive Church. 

"4. The pure and austere morals of the Christians. 

"5. The union and discipline of the Christian republic, which gradually formed an 
independent and increasing state in the heart of the Roman empire." 

Broadly speaking, this analysis may be accepted, but with some comments. The first cause— the 
inflexibility and intolerance derived from the Jews— may be wholly accepted. We have seen in our 
own day the advantages of intolerance in propaganda. The Christians, for the most part, believed 
that they alone would go to heaven, and that the most awful punishments would, in the next world, 
fall upon the heathen. The other religions which competed for favour during the third century had 
not this threatening character. The worshippers of the Great Mother, for example, while they had a 
ceremony —the Taurobolium— which was analogous to baptism, did not teach that those who 
omitted it would go to hell. It may be remarked, incidentally, that the Taurobolium was expensive: 
a bull had to be killed, and its blood allowed to trickle over the convert. A rite of this sort is 
aristocratic, and cannot be the basis of a religion which is to embrace the great bulk of the 
population, rich and poor, free and slave. In such respects, Christianity had an advantage over all 
its rivals. 

As regards the doctrine of a future life, in the West it was first taught by the Orphics and thence 
adopted by Greek philosophers. 


* The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Ch. XV. 


- 330 - 



The Hebrew prophets, some of them, taught the resurrection of the body, but it seems to have 
been from the Greeks that the Jews leamt to believe in the resurrection of the spirit. ^_The 
doctrine of immortality, in Greece, had a popular form in Orphism and a learned form in 
Platonism. The latter, being based upon difficult arguments, could not become widely popular; 
the Orphic form, however, probably had a great influence on the general opinions of later 
antiquity, not only among pagans, but also among Jews and Christians. Elements of mystery 
religions, both Orphic and Asiatic, enter largely into Christian theology; in all of them, the 

central myth is that of the dying god who rises again. think, therefore, that the doctrine of 
immortality must have had less to do with the spread of Christianity than Gibbon thought. 

Miracles certainly played a very large part in Christian propaganda. But miracles, in later 
antiquity, were very common, and were not the prerogative of any one religion. It is not 
altogether easy to see why, in this competition, the Christian miracles came to be more widely 
believed than those of other sects. I think Gibbon omits one very important matter, namely the 
possession of a Sacred Book. The miracles to which Christians appealed had begun in a remote 
antiquity, among a nation which the ancients felt to be mysterious; there was a consistent 
history, from the Creation onwards, according to which Providence had always worked 
wonders, first for the Jews, then for the Christians. To a modern historical student it is obvious 
that the early history of the Israelites is in the main legendary, but not so to the ancients. They 
believed in the Homeric account of the siege of Troy, in Romulus and Remus, and so on; why, 
asks Origen, should you accept these traditions and reject those of the Jews? To this argument 
there was no logical answer. It was therefore natural to accept Old Testament miracles, and, 
when they had been admitted, those of more recent date became credible, especially in view of 
the Christian interpretation of the prophets. 

The morals of the Christians, before Constantine, were undoubtedly very superior to those of 
average pagans. The Christians were persecuted at times, and were almost always at a 
disadvantage in competition with pagans. They believed firmly that virtue would be 


* See Oesterley and Robinson, Hebrew Religion. 
a 

G See Angus, The Mystery Religions and Christianity. 


- 331 - 


rewarded in heaven and sin punished in hell. Their sexual ethics had a strictness that was rare in 
antiquity. Pliny, whose official duty it was to persecute them, testifies to their high moral 
character. After the conversion of Constantine, there were, of course, time-servers among 
Christians; but prominent ecclesiastics, with some exceptions, continued to be men of inflexible 
moral principles. I think Gibbon is right in attributing great importance to this high moral level as 
one of the causes of the spread of Christianity. 

Gibbon puts last "the union and discipline of the Christian republic." I think, from a political point 
of view, this was the most important of his five causes. In the modern world, we are accustomed 
to political organization; every politician has to reckon with the Catholic vote, but it is balanced 
by the vote of other organized groups. A Catholic candidate for the Presidency is at a 
disadvantage, because of Protestant prejudice. But, if there were no such thing as Protestant 
prejudice, a Catholic candidate would stand a better chance than any other. This seems to have 
been Constantine's calculation. The support of the Christians, as a single organized bloc, was to be 
obtained by favouring them. Whatever dislike of the Christians existed was unorganized and 
politically ineffective. Probably Rostovtseff is right in holding that a large part of the army was 
Christian, and that this was what most influenced Constantine. However that may be, the 
Christians, while still a minority, had a kind of organization which was then new, though now 
common, and which gave them all the political influence of a pressure group to which no other 
pressure groups are opposed. This was the natural consequence of their virtual monopoly of zeal, 
and their zeal was an inheritance from the Jews. 

Unfortunately, as soon as the Christians acquired political power, they turned their zeal against 
each other. There had been heresies, not a few, before Constantine, but the orthodox had had no 
means of punishing them. When the State became Christian, great prizes, in the shape of power 
and wealth, became open to ecclesiastics; there were disputed elections, and theological quarrels 
were also quarrels for worldly advantages. Constantine himself preserved a certain degree of 
neutrality in the disputes of theologians, but after his death ( 337) his successors (except for Julian 
the Apostate) were, in a greater or less degree, favourable to the Arians, until the accession of 
Theodosius in 379. 


- 332 - 



The hero of this period is Athanasius ( ca . 297-373), who was throughout his long life the most 
intrepid champion of Nicene orthodoxy. 

The period from Constantine to the Council of Chalcedon ( 45 1) is peculiar owing to the political 
importance of theology. Two questions successively agitated the Christian world: first, the nature 
of the Trinity, and then the doctrine of the Incarnation. Only the first of these was to the fore in the 
time of Athanasius. Arius, a cultivated Alexandrian priest, maintained that the Son is not the equal 
of the Father, but was created by Him. At an earlier period, this view might not have aroused 
much antagonism, but in the fourth century most theologians rejected it. The view which finally 
prevailed was that the Father and the Son were equal, and of the same substance; they were, 
however, distinct Persons. The view that they were not distinct, but only different aspects of one 
Being, was the Sabellian heresy, called after its founder Sabellius. Orthodoxy thus had to tread a 
narrow line: those who unduly emphasized the distinctness of the Father and the Son were in 
danger of Arianism, and those who unduly emphasized their oneness were in danger of 
Sabellianism. 

The doctrines of Arius were condemned by the Council of NicAja ( 325) by an overwhelming 
majority. But various modifications were suggested by various theologians, and favoured by 
Emperors. Athanacius, who was Bishop of Alexandria from 328 till his death, was constantly in 
exile because of his zeal for Nicene orthodoxy. He had immense popularity in Egypt, which, 
throughout the controversy, followed him unwaveringly. It is curious that, in the course of 
theological controversy, national (or at least regional) feeling, which had seemed extinct since the 
Roman conquest, revived. Constantinople and Asia inclined to Arianism; Egypt was fanatically 
Athanasian; the West steadfastly adhered to the decrees of the Council of NicAja. After the Arian 
controversy was ended, new controversies, of a more or less kindred sort, arose, in which Egypt 
became heretical in one direction and Syria in another. These heresies, which were persecuted by 
the orthodox, impaired the unity of the Eastern Empire, and facilitated the Mohammedan 
conquest. The separatist movements, in themselves, are not surprising, but it is curious that they 
should have been associated with very subtle and abstruse theological questions. 

The Emperors, from 335 to 378, favoured more or less Arian 


- 333 - 



opinions as far as they dared, except for Julian the Apostate ( 361363), who, as a pagan, was 
neutral as regards the internal disputes of the Christians. At last, in 379, the Emperor Theodosius 
gave his full support to the Catholics, and their victory throughout the Empire was complete. Saint 
Ambrose, Saint Jerome, and Saint Augustine, whom we shall consider in the next chapter, lived 
most of their lives during this period of Catholic triumph. It was succeeded, however, in the West, 
by another Arian domination, that of the Goths and Vandals, who, between them, conquered most 
of the Western Empire. Their power lasted for about a century, at the end of which it was 
destroyed by Justinian, the Lombards, and the Franks, of whom Justinian and the Franks, and 
ultimately the Lombards also, were orthodox. Thus at last the Catholic faith achieved definitive 
success. 

CHAPTER III Three Doctors of the Church 

FOUR men are called the Doctors of the Western Church: SaintAmbrose, Saint Jerome, Saint 
Augustine, and Pope Gregory the Great. Of these the first three were contemporaries, while the 
fourth belonged to a later date. I shall, in this chapter, give some account of the life and times of 
the first three, reserving for a later chapter an account of the doctrines of Saint Augustine, who is, 
for us, the most important of the three. 

Ambrose, Jerome, and Augustine all flourished during the brief period between the victory of the 
Catholic Church in the Roman Empire and the barbarian invasion. All three were young during 
the reign of Julian the Apostate; Jerome lived ten years after the sack of Rome by the Goths under 
Alaric; Augustine lived till the irruption of the Vandals into Africa, and died while they were 
besieging Hippo, of which he was bishop. Immediately after their time, the masters of Italy, Spain, 
and Africa were not only barbarians, but 

-334- 



Arian heretics. Civilization declined for centuries, and it was not until nearly a thousand years 
later that Christendom again produced men who were their equals in learning and culture. 
Throughout the dark ages and the medieval period, their authority was revered; they, more than 
any other men, fixed the mould into which the Church was shaped. Speaking broadly, Saint 
Ambrose determined the ecclesiastical conception of the relation of Church and State; Saint 
Jerome gave the Western Church its Latin Bible and a great part of the impetus to monasticism; 
while Saint Augustine fixed the theology of the Church until the Refonnation, and, later, a great 
part of the doctrines of Luther and Calvin. Few men have surpassed these three in influence on the 
course of history. The independence of the Church in relation to the secular State, as successfully 
maintained by Saint Ambrose, was a new and revolutionary doctrine, which prevailed until the 
Refonnation; when Hobbes combated it in the seventeenth century, it was against Saint Ambrose 
that he chiefly argued. Saint Augustine was in the forefront of theological controversy during the 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, Protestants and Jansenists being for him, and orthodox 
Catholics against him. 

The capital of the Western Empire, at the end of the fourth century, was Milan, of which Ambrose 
was bishop. His duties brought him constantly into relations with the emperors, to whom he spoke 
habitually as an equal, sometimes as a superior. His dealings with the imperial court illustrate a 
general contrast characteristic of the times: while the State was feeble, incompetent, governed by 
unprincipled self-seekers, and totally without any policy beyond that of momentary expedients, 
the Church was vigorous, able, guided by men prepared to sacrifice everything personal in its 
interests, and with a policy so far-sighted that it brought victory for the next thousand years. It is 
true that these merits were offset by fanaticism and superstition, but without these no refonning 
movement could, at that time, have succeeded. 

Saint Ambrose had every opportunity to seek success in the service of the State. His father, also 
named Ambrose, was a high official-prefect of the Gauls. The Saint was bom, probably, at 
Augusta Treverorum (TrA'ves), a frontier garrison town, where the Roman legions were stationed 
to keep the Gennans at bay. At the age of thirteen he was taken to Rome, where he had a good 
education, in- 


- 335 - 



eluding a thorough grounding in Greek. When he grew up he took to the law, in which he was 
very successful; and at the age of thirty he was made governor of Liguria and Afmilia. 
Nevertheless, four years later he turned his back on secular government, and by popular acclaim 
became bishop of Milan, in opposition to an Arian candidate. He gave all his worldly goods to the 
poor, and devoted the whole of the rest of his life to the service of the Church, sometimes at great 
personal risk. This choice was certainly not dictated by worldly motives, but, if it had been, it 
would have been wise. In the State, even if he had become Emperor, he could at that time have 
found no such scope for his administrative statesmanship as he found in the discharge of his 
episcopal duties. 

During the first nine years of Ambrose's episcopate, the Emperor of the West was Gratian, who 
was Catholic, virtuous, and careless. He was so devoted to the chase that he neglected the 
government, and in the end was assassinated. He was succeeded, throughout most of the Western 
Empire, by a usurper named Maximus; but in Italy the succession passed to Gratian's younger 
brother Valentinian II, who was still a boy. At first, the imperial power was exercised by his 
mother, Justina, widow of the Emperor Valentinian I; but as she was an Arian, conflicts between 
her and Saint Ambrose were inevitable. 

All the three Saints with whom we are concerned in this chapter wrote innumerable letters, of 
which many are preserved; the consequence is that we know more about them than about any of 
the pagan philosophers, and more than about all but a few of the ecclesiastics of the Middle Ages. 
Saint Augustine wrote letters to all and sundry, mostly on doctrine or Church discipline; Saint 
Jerome’s letters are mainly addressed to ladies, giving advice on how to preserve virginity; but 
Saint Ambrose's most important and interesting letters are to Emperors, telling them in what 
respects they have fallen short of their duty, or, on occasion, congratulating them on having 
performed it. 

The first public question with which Ambrose had to deal was that of the altar and statue of 
Victory in Rome. Paganism lingered longer among the senatorial families of the capital than it did 
elsewhere; the official religion was in the hands of an aristocratic priesthood, and was bound up 
with the imperial pride of the conquerors of the world. The statue of Victory in the Senate House 
had been 


- 336 - 



removed by Constantius, the son of Constantine, and restored by Julian the Apostate. The 
Emperor Gratian again removed the statue, whereupon a deputation of the Senate, headed by 
Symmachus, Prefect of the City, asked for its renewed restoration. 

Symmachus, who also played a part in the life of Augustine, was a distinguished member of a 
distinguished family-rich, aristocratic, cultivated, and pagan. He was banished from Rome by 
Gratian in 382 for his protest against the removal of the statue of Victory, but not for long, as he 
was Prefect of the City in 384. He was the grandfather of the Symmachus who was the father- 
in-law of Boethius, and who was prominent in the reign of Theodoric. 

The Christian senators objected, and by the help of Ambrose and the Pope ( Damasus) their 
view was made to prevail with the Emperor. After the death of Gratian, Symmachus and the 
pagan senators petitioned the new Emperor, Valentinian II, in A.D. 384. In rebuttal of this 
renewed attempt, Ambrose wrote to the Emperor, setting forth the thesis that, as all Romans 
owed military service to their sovereign, so he (the Emperor) owed service to Almighty God. * * 
"Let no one," he says, "take advantage of your youth; if he be a heathen who demands this, it is 
not right that he should bind your mind with the bonds of his own superstition; but by his zeal 
he ought to teach and admonish you how to be zealous for the true faith, since he defends vain 
things with all the passion of truth." To be compelled to swear at the altar of an idol, he says, is, 
to a Christian, persecution. "If it were a civil cause the right of reply would be reserved for the 
opposing party; it is a religious cause, and I the bishop make a claim. . . . Certainly if anything 
else is decreed, we bishops cannot constantly suffer it and take no notice; you indeed may come 
to the Church, but will find either no priest there, or one who will resist you." — 

The next epistle points out that the endowments of the Church serve purposes never served by 
the wealth of heathen temples. "The possessions of the Church are the maintenance of the poor. 
Let them count up how many captives the temples have ransomed, what food they have 
contributed for the poor, to what exiles they have supplied the means of living." This was a 
telling argument, and one which was quite justified by Christian practice. 


* This thesis seems to anticipate the outlook of feudalism. 


* Epistle XVII. 


- 337 - 


Saint Ambrose won his point, but a subsequent usurper, Eugenius, who favoured the heathen, 
restored the altar and statue. It was only after the defeat of Eugenius by Theodosius in 394 that 
the question was finally decided in favour of the Christians. 

The bishop was, at first, on very friendly terms with the imperial court, and was employed on a 
diplomatic mission to the usurper Maximus, who, it was feared, might invade Italy. But before 
long a grave matter of controversy arose. The Empress Justina, as an Arian, requested that one 
church in Milan might be ceded to the Arians, but Ambrose refused. The people sided with him, 
and thronged the basilica in great crowds. Gothic soldiers, who were Arians, were sent to take 
possession, but fraternized with the people. "The Counts and Tribunes," he says in a spirited 
letter to his sister, jl"camc and urged me to cause the basilica to be quickly surrendered, saying 
that the Emperor was exercising his rights since everything was under his power. I answered 
that if he asked of me what was mine, that is, my land, my money, or whatever of this kind was 
my own, I would not refuse it, although all that I have belonged to the poor, but that those 
things which are God's are not subject to the imperial power. 'If my patrimony is required, enter 
upon it; if my body, I will go at once. Do you wish to cast me into chains, or to give me to 
death? It will be a pleasure to me. I will not defend myself with throngs of people, nor will I 
cling to the altars and entreat for my life, but will more gladly be slain myself for the altars.' I 
was indeed struck with horror when I leamt that armed men had been sent to take possession of 
the basilica, lest while the people were defending the basilica, there might be some slaughter 
which would tend to the injury of the whole city. I prayed that I might not survive the 
destruction of so great a city, or it might be of the whole of Italy." 

These fears were not exaggerated, as the Gothic soldiery were likely to break out into savagery, 
as they did twenty-five years later in the sack of Rome. 

Ambrose's strength lay in the support of the people. He was accused of inciting them, but 
replied that "it was in my power not to excite them, but in God's hands to quiet them." None of 
the Arians, he says, dared to go forth, as there was not one Arian among the 


* Epistle XX. 


- 338 - 


citizens. He was formally commanded to surrender the basilica, and the soldiers were ordered to 
use violence if necessary. But in the end they refused to use violence, and the Emperor was 
compelled to give way. A great battle had been won in the contest for ecclesiastical independence; 
Ambrose had demonstrated that there were matters in which the State must yield to the Church, 
and had thereby established a new principle which retains its importance to the present day. 

His next conflict was with the Emperor Theodosius. A synagogue had been burnt, and the Count 
of the East reported that this had been done at the instigation of the local bishop. The Emperor 
ordered that the actual incendiaries should be punished, and that the guilty bishop should rebuild 
the synagogue. Saint Ambrose neither admits nor denies the bishop's complicity, but is indignant 
that the Emperor should seem to side with Jews against Christians. Suppose the bishop refuses to 
obey? He will then have to become a martyr if he persists, or an apostate if he gives way. Suppose 
the Count decides to rebuild the synagogue himself at the expense of the Christians? In that case 
the Emperor will have an apostate Count, and Christian money will be taken to support unbelief. 
"Shall, then, a place be made for the unbelief of the Jews out of the spoils of the Church, and shall 
the patrimony, which by the favour of Christ has been gained for Christians, be transferred to the 
treasuries of unbelievers?" He continues: "But perhaps the cause of discipline moves you, O 
Emperor. Which, then, is of greater importance, the show of discipline or the cause of religion? It 
is needful that judgement should yield to religion. Have you not heard, O Emperor, how, when 
Julian commanded that the Temple of Jerusalem should be restored, those who were clearing the 
rubbish were consumed by fire?" 

It is clear that, in the Saint's opinion, the destruction of synagogues should not be punished in any 
way. This is an example of the manner in which, as soon as it acquired power, the Church began 
to stimulate anti-Semitism. 

The next conflict between Emperor and Saint was more honourable to the latter. In A.D. 390, 
when Theodosius was in Milan, a mob in Thessalonica murdered the captain of the garrison. 
Theodosius, on receiving the news, was seized with ungovernable fury, and ordered an 
abominable revenge. When the people were assembled in the circus, the soldiers fell upon them, 
and massacred at least seven thousand of 


- 339 - 



them in an indiscriminate slaughter. Hereupon Ambrose, who had endeavoured in advance to 
restrain the Emperor, but in vain, wrote him a letter full of splendid courage, on a purely moral 
issue, involving, for once, no question of theology or the power of the Church: 

"There was that done in the city of the Thessalonians of which no similar record exists, which I 
was not able to prevent happening; which, indeed, I had before said would be most atrocious 
when I so often petitioned against it." 

David repeatedly sinned, and confessed his sin with penitence. f_Will Theodosius do likewise? 
Ambrose decides that "I dare not offer the sacrifice if you intend to be present. Is that which is 
not allowed after shedding the blood of one innocent person, allowed after shedding the blood 
of many? I do not think so." 

The Emperor repented, and, divested of the purple, did public penance in the cathedral of 
Milan. From that time until his death in 395, he had no friction with Ambrose. 

Ambrose, while he was eminent as a statesman, was, in other respects, merely typical of his age. 
He wrote, like other ecclesiastical authors, a treatise in praise of virginity, and another 
deprecating the remarriage of widows. When he had decided on the site for his new cathedral, 
two skeletons (revealed in a vision, it was said) were conveniently discovered on the spot, were 
found to work miracles, and were declared by him to be those of two martyrs. Other miracles 
are related in his letters, with all the credulity characteristic of his times. He was inferior to 
Jerome as a scholar, and to Augustine as a philosopher. But as a statesman, who skilfully and 
courageously consolidated the power of the Church, he stands out as a man of the first rank. 

Jerome is chiefly notable as the translator who produced the Vulgate, which remains to this day 
the official Catholic version of the Bible. Until his day the Western Church relied, as regards 
the Old Testament, chiefly on translations from the Septuagint, which, in important ways 
differed from the Hebrew original. Christians were given to maintaining that the Jews, since the 
rise of Christianity, had falsified the Hebrew text where it seemed to predict the Messiah. This 
was a view which sound scholarship showed to be untenable, 


* This allusion to the Books of Samuel begins a line of biblical argument against kings 
which persisted throughout the Middle Ages, and even in the, conflict of the Puritans with 
the Stuarts. It appears for instance in Milton. 


- 340 - 


and which Jerome firmly rejected. He accepted the help of rabbis, given secretly for fear of the 
Jews. In defending himself against Christian criticism he said: "Let him who would challenge 
aught in this translation ask the Jews." Because of his acceptance of the Hebrew text in the form 
which the Jews regarded as correct, his version had, at first, a largely hostile reception; but it 
won its way, partly because Saint Augustine on the whole supported it. It was a great 
achievement, involving considerable textual criticism. 

Jerome was bom in 345— five years after Ambrose— not far from Aquileia, at a town called 
Stridon, which was destroyed by the Goths in 377. His family were well-to-do, but not rich. In 
363 he went to Rome, where he studied rhetoric and sinned. After travelling in Gaul, he settled 
in Aquileia, and became an ascetic. The next five years he spent as a hermit in the Syrian 
wilderness. "His life while in the desert was one of rigorous penance, of tears and groans 
alternating with spiritual ecstasy, and of temptations from haunting memories of Roman life; he 
lived in a cell or cavern; he earned his daily bread, and was clad in sackcloth." AA ftcr this 
period, he travelled to Constantinople, and lived in Rome for three years, where he became the 
friend and adviser of Pope Damasus, with whose encouragement he undertook his translation of 
the Bible. 

Saint Jerome was a man of many quarrels. He quarrelled with Saint Augustine about the 
somewhat questionable behaviour of Saint Peter as related by Saint Paul in Galatians II; he 
broke with his friend Rufinus over Origen; and he was so vehement against Pelagius that his 
monastery was attacked by a Pelagian mob. After the death of Damasus, he seems to have 
quarrelled with the new Pope; he had, while in Rome, become acquainted with various ladies 
who were both aristocratic and pious, some of whom he persuaded to adopt the ascetic life. The 
new Pope, in common with many other people in Rome, disliked this. For this reason among 
others, Jerome left Rome for Bethlehem, where he remained from 386 till his death in 420. 

Among his distinguished female converts, two were especially notable: the widow Paula and 
her daughter Eustochium. Both these ladies accompanied him on his circuitous journey to 
Bethlehem. They were of the highest nobility, and one cannot but feel a flavour of 


* Select Library ofNicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Vol. VI, p. 17. 


- 341 - 


snobbery in the Saint's attitude to them. When Paula died and was buried at Bethlehem, Jerome 
composed an epitaph for her tomb: 

Within this tomb a child of Scipio lies, A daughter of the far-famed Pauline house, A scion of 
the Gracchi, of the stock Of Agamemnon's self, illustrious: Here rests the lady Paula, well- 
beloved Of both her parents, with Eustochium For daughter; she the first of Roman dames Who 
hardship chose and Bethlehem for Christ. 

Some of Jerome's letters to Eustochium are curious. He gives her advice on the preservation of 
virginity, very detailed and frank; he explains the exact anatomical meaning of certain 
euphemisms in the Old Testament; and he employs a kind of erotic mysticism in praising the 
joys of conventual life. A nun is the Bride of Christ; this marriage is celebrated in the Song of 
Solomon. In a long letter written at the time when she took the vows, he gives a remarkable 
message to her mother: "Are you angry with her because she chooses to be a king's [Christ's] 
wife and not a soldier's? She has conferred on you a high privilege; you are now the mother-in- 

law of God." 

To Eustochium herself, in the same letter (XXII), he says: 

"Ever let the privacy of your chamber guard you; ever let the Bridegroom sport with you within. 
Do you pray? You speak to the Bridegroom. Do you read? He speaks to you. When sleep 
overtakes you He will come behind and put His hand through the hole of the door, and your 
heart shall be moved for Him; and you will awake and rise up and say: 'I am sick of love.’ Then 
He will reply: 'A garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse; a spring shut up, a fountain sealed.’" 

In the same letter he relates how, after cutting himself off from relations and friends, "and— 
harder still— from the dainty food to which I had been accustomed," he still could not bear to be 
parted from his library, and took it with him to the desert. "And so, miserable man that I was, I 
would fast only that I might afterwards read Cicero." After days and nights of remorse, he 
would fall again, and read Plautus. After such indulgence, the style of the prophets seemed 


* Ibid., p. 212. 


a 

^ Ibid., p. 30. 


- 342 - 


"rude and repellent." At last, during a fever, he dreamed that, at the Last Judgement, Christ 
asked him who he was, and he replied that he was a Christian. The answer came: "Thou liest, 
thou art a follower of Cicero and not of Christ." Thereupon he was ordered to be scourged. At 
length Jerome, in his dream, cried out: "Lord, if ever again I possess worldly books, or if ever 
again I read such, I have denied Thee." This, he adds, "was no sleep or idle dream." 

After this, for some years, his letters contain few classical quotations. But after a certain time he 
lapses again into verses from Virgil, Horace, and even Ovid. They seem, however, to be from 
memory, particularly as some of them are repeated over and over again. 

Jerome's letters express the feelings produced by the fall of the Roman Empire more vividly 
than any others known to me. In 396 he writes: — 

"I shudder when I think of the catastrophes of our time. For twenty years and more the blood of 
Romans has been shed daily between Constantinople and the Julian Alps. Scythia, Thrace, 
Macedonia, Dacia, Thessaly, Achaia, Epirus, Dalmatia, the Pannonias— each and all of these 
have been sacked and pillaged and plundered by Goths and Sarmatians, Quadi and Alans, Huns 
and Vandals and Marchmen. . . . The Roman world is falling: yet we hold up our heads instead 
of bowing them. What courage, think you, have the Corinthians now, or the Athenians or the 
Lacedaemonians or the Arcadians, or any of the Greeks over whom the barbarians bear sway? I 
have mentioned only a few cities, but these once the capitals of no mean States." 

He goes on to relate the ravages of the Huns in the East, and ends with the reflection: "To treat 
such themes as they deserve, Thucydides and Sallust would be as good as dumb." 

Seventeen years later, three years after the sack of Rome, he writes: a€j 

"The world si nk s into ruin: yes! but shameful to say our sins still live and flourish. The 
renowned city, the capital of the Roman Em- 


* This hostility to pagan literature persisted in the Church until the eleventh century, except 
in Ireland, where the Olympian gods had never been worshipped, and were therefore not 
feared by the Church. 

a 

g Letter LX. 
a 

€ Letter CXXVIII. 
i 


- 343 - 


pire, is swallowed up in one tremendous fire; and there is no part of the earth where Romans are 
not in exile. Churches once held sacred are now but heaps of dust and ashes; and yet we have our 
minds set on the desire of gain. We live as though we were going to die tomorrow; yet we build as 
though we were going to live always in this world. Our walls shine with gold, our ceilings also 
and the capitals of our pillars; yet Christ dies before our doors naked and hungry in the person of 
His poor." 

This passage occurs incidentally in a letter to a friend who has decided to devote his daughter to 
perpetual virginity, and most of it is concerned with the rules to be observed in the education of 
girls so dedicated. It is strange that, with all Jerome's deep feeling about the fall of the ancient 
world, he thinks the preservation of virginity more important than victory over the Huns and 
Vandals and Goths. Never once do his thoughts turn to any possible measure of practical 
statesmanship; never once does he point out the evils of the fiscal system, or of reliance on an 
army composed of barbarians. The same is true of Ambrose and of Augustine; Ambrose, it is true, 
was a statesman, but only on behalf of the Church. It is no wonder that the Empire fell into ruin 
when all the best and most vigorous minds of the age were so completely remote from secular 
concerns. On the other hand, if ruin was inevitable, the Christian outlook was admirably fitted to 
give men fortitude, and to enable them to preserve their religious hopes when earthly hopes 
seemed vain. The expression of this point of view, in The City of God, was the supreme merit of 
Saint Augustine. 

Of Saint Augustine I shall speak, in this chapter, only as a man; as a theologian and philosopher, I 
shall consider him in the next chapter. 

He was born in 354, nine years after Jerome, and fourteen years after Ambrose; he was a native of 
Africa, where he passed much the greater part of his life. His mother was a Christian, but his 
father was not. After a period as a ManichAjan, he became a Catholic, and was baptized by 
Ambrose in Milan. He became bishop of Hippo, not far from Carthage, about the year 396. There 
he remained until his death in 430. 

Of his early life we know much more than in the case of most ecclesiastics, because he has told of 
it in his Confessions. This book has had famous imitators, particularly Rousseau and Tolstoy, but I 


- 344 - 



do not thi nk it has any comparable predecessors. Saint Augustine is in some ways similar to 
Tolstoy, to whom, however, he is superior in intellect. He was a passionate man, in youth very 
far from a pattern of virtue, but driven by an inner impulse to search for truth and righteousness. 
Like Tolstoy, he was obsessed, in his later years, by a sense of sin, which made his life stern 
and his philosophy inhuman. He combated heresies vigorously, but some of his own views, 
when repeated by Jansenius in the seventeenth century, were pronounced heretical. Until the 
Protestants took up his opinions, however, the Catholic Church had never impugned their 
orthodoxy. 

One of the first incidents of his life related in the Confessions occurred in his boyhood, and did 
not, in itself, greatly distinguish him from other boys. It appears that, with some companions of 
his own age, he despoiled a neighbour's pear tree, although he was not hungry, and his parents 
had better pears at home. He continued throughout his life to consider this an act of almost 
incredible wickedness. It would not have been so bad if he had been hungry, or had had no 
other means of getting pears; but, as it was, the act was one of pure mischief, inspired by the 
love of wickedness for its own sake. It is this that makes it so unspeakably black. He beseeches 
God to forgive him: 

"Behold my heart, O God, behold my heart, which Thou hadst pity upon in the bottom of the 
abyss. Now, behold, let my heart tell Thee, what it sought there, that I should be gratuitously 
wicked, having no temptation to that evil deed, but the evil deed itself. It was foul, and I loved 
it; I loved to perish, I loved mine own fault, not that for the sake of which I committed the fault, 
but my fault itself I loved. Foul soul, falling from the firmament to expulsion from Thy 
presence; not seeking aught through the shame, but the shame itself!" f 

He goes on like this for seven chapters, and all about some pears plucked from a tree in a boyish 

prank. To a modem mind, this seems morbid; ^£-but in his own age it seemed right and a mark 
of holiness. The sense of sin, which was very strong in his day, came to the Jews as a way of 
reconciling self-importance with outward defeat. Yahweh was omnipotent, and Yahweh was 
specially interested in the Jews; why, then, did they not prosper? Because they were wicked: 
they 


* Confessions, Bk. II, Ch. IV. 

^ I must except Mahatma Gandhi, whose autobiography contains passages closely similar to 
€ the above. 


- 345 - 


were idolators, they married gentiles, they failed to observe the Law. God's purposes were centred 
on the Jews, but, since righteousness is the greatest of goods, and is achieved through tribulation, 
they must first be chastised, and must recognize their chastisement as a mark of God's paternal 
love. 

Christians put the Church in place of the Chosen People, but except in one respect this made little 
difference to the psychology of sin. The Church, like the Jews, suffered tribulation; the Church 
was troubled by heresies; individual Christians fell into apostasy under the stress of persecution. 
There was, however, one important development, already made, to a great extent, by the Jews, and 
that was the substitution of individual for communal sin. Originally, it was the Jewish nation that 
sinned, and that was collectively punished; but later sin became more personal, thus losing its 
political character. When the Church was substituted for the Jewish nation, this change became 
essential, since the Church, as a spiritual entity, could not sin, but the individual sinner could 
cease to be in communion with the Church. Sin, as we said just now, is connected with self- 
importance. Originally the importance was that of the Jewish nation, but subsequently it was that 
of the individual— not of the Church, because the Church never sinned. It thus came about that 
Christian theology had two parts, one concerned with the Church, and one with the individual 
soul. In later times, the first of these was most emphasized by Catholics, and the second by 
Protestants, but in Saint Augustine both exist equally, without his having any sense of 
disharmony. Those who are saved are those whom God has predestined to salvation; this is a 
direct relation of the soul to God. But no one will be saved unless he has been baptized, and 
thereby become a member of the Church; this makes the Church an intennediary between the soul 
and God. 

Sin is what is essential to the direct relation, since it explains how a beneficent Deity can cause 
men to suffer, and how, in spite of this, individual souls can be what is of most importance in the 
created world. It is therefore not surprising that the theology upon which the Refonnation relied 
should be due to a man whose sense of sin was abnonnal. 

So much for the pears. Let us now see what the Confessions have to say on some other subjects. 


- 346 - 



Augustine relates how he learnt Latin, painlessly, at his mother's knee, but hated Greek, which 
they tried to teach him at school, because he was "urged vehemently with cruel threats and 
punishments." To the end of his life, his knowledge of Greek remained slight. One might have 
supposed that he would go on, from this contrast, to draw a moral in favor of gentle methods in 
education. What he says, however, is: 

"It is quite clear, then, that a free curiosity has more power to make us learn these things than a 
terrifying obligation. Only this obligation restrains the waverings of that freedom by Thy laws, 

O my God, Thy laws, from the master's rod to the martyr's trials, for Thy laws have the effect of 
mingling for us certain wholesale bitters, which recall us to Thee away from that pernicious 
blithesomeness, by means of which we depart from Thee." 

The schoolmaster's blows, though they failed to make him know Greek, cured him of being 
perniciously blithesome, and were, on this ground, a desirable part of education. For those who 
make sin the most important of all human concerns, this view is logical. Fie goes on to point out 
that he sinned, not only as a school-boy, when he told lies and stole food, but even earlier; 
indeed he devotes a whole chapter (Bk. I, Ch. VII) to proving that even infants at the breast are 
full of sin— gluttony, jealousy, and other horrible vices. 

When he reached adolescence, the lusts of the flesh overcame him. "Where was I, and how far 
was I exiled from the delights of Thy house, in that sixteenth year of the age of my flesh, when 
the madness of lust which hath licence through man's viciousness, though forbidden by Thy 
laws, took the rule over me, and I resigned myself wholly to it?" V 

His father took no pains to prevent this evil, but confined himself to giving help in Augustine's 
studies. His mother, Saint Monica, on the contrary, exhorted him to chastity, but in vain. And 
even she did not, at that time, suggest marriage, "lest my prospects might be embarrassed by the 
clog of a wife." 

At the age of sixteen he went to Carthage, "where there seethed all around me a cauldron of 
lawless loves. I loved not yet, yet I loved 


* Confessions, Bk. II, Ch. II. 


- 347 - 


to love, and out of a deep-seated want, I hated myself for wanting not. I sought what I might 
love, in love with loving, and I hated safety. ... To love then, and to be beloved, was sweet to 
me; but more, when I obtained to enjoy the person I loved. I defded, therefore, the spring of 
friendship with the filth of concupiscence, and I beclouded its brightness with the hell of 
lustfulness." ^_These words describe his relation to a mistress whom he loved faithfully for 

many years, —and by whom he had a son, whom he also loved, and to whom, after his 
conversion, he gave much care in religious education. 

The time came when he and his mother thought he ought to begin to think of marrying. He 
became engaged to a girl of whom she approved, and it was held necessary that he should break 
with his mistress. "My mistress," he says, "being tom from my side as a hindrance to my 
marriage, my heart which clave unto her was tom and wounded and bleeding. And she returned 
to Africa [ Augustine was at this time in Milan], vowing unto Thee never to know any other 
man, leaving with me my son by her." a€j As. however, the marriage could not take place for 
two years, owing to the girl's youth, he took meanwhile another mistress, less official and less 
acknowledged. His conscience increasingly troubled him, and he used to pray: "Give me 
chastity and continence, only not yet." A§ A t last, before the time had come for his marriage, 
religion won a complete victory, and he dedicated the rest of his life to celibacy. 

To return to an earlier time: in his nineteenth year, having achieved proficiency in rhetoric, he 
was recalled to philosophy by Cicero. He tried reading the Bible, but found it lacking in 
Ciceronian dignity. It was at this time that he became a ManichAjan, which grieved his mother. 
By profession he was a teacher of rhetoric. He was addicted to astrology, to which, in later life, 
he was averse, because it teaches that "the inevitable cause of thy sin is in the sky." a A He read 
philosophy, so far as it could be read in Latin; he mentions particularly Aristotle Ten 
Categories, which, he says, he understood without the help of a teacher. "And what did it profit 
me, that I, the vilest slave of evil passions, read by myself all the books of so-called 'liberal' 
arts; 


* Confessions, Bk. Ill, Ch. I. 
A 

„ Ibid., Bk. VIII, Ch. VII. 

§ 

* Ibid., Bk. IV, Ch. II. 
a 

€ Ibid., Bk. VI, Ch. XV. 
i 

a 

“ Ibid., Bk. IV, Ch. III. 

¥ 


- 348 - 


and understood whatever I could read? . . . For I had my back to the light, and my face to the 
things enlightened; whence my face . . . itself was not enlightened." ^_At this time he believed 
that God was a vast and bright body, and he himself a part of that body. One could wish that he 
had told in detail the tenets of the ManichAjans, instead of merely saying they were erroneous. 

It is interesting that Saint Augustine's first reasons for rejecting the doctrines of ManichAjus 

were scientific. He remembered— so he tells us — — what he had learned of astronomy from the 
writings of the best astronomers, "and I compared them with the sayings of ManichAjus, who in 
his crazy folly has written much and copiously upon these subjects; but none of his reasoning of 
the solstices, nor equinoxes, nor eclipses, nor whatever of this kind I had learned in books of 
secular philosophy, was satisfactory to me. But I was commanded to believe; and yet it 
corresponded not with the reasonings obtained by calculations, and by my own observations, 
but was quite contrary." He is careful to point out that scientific mistakes are not in themselves 
a sign of errors as to the faith, but only become so when delivered with an air of authority as 
known through divine inspiration. One wonders what he would have thought if he had lived in 
the time of Galileo. 

In the hope of resolving his doubts, a ManichAjan bishop named Faustus, reputed the most 
learned member of the sect, met him and reasoned with him. But "I found him first utterly 
ignorant of liberal sciences, save grammar, and that but in an ordinary way. But because he had 
read some of Tully's Orations, a very few books of Seneca, some things of the poets, and such 
few volumes of his own sect, as were written in Latin and in logical order, and was daily 
practised in speaking, he acquired a certain eloquence, which proved the more pleasing and 
seductive, because under the control of his good sense, and with a certain natural grace." a€j 

He found Faustus quite unable to solve his astronomical difficulties. The books of the 
ManichAjans, he tells us, "are full of lengthy fables, of the heaven, and stars, sun, and moon," 
which do not agree with what has been discovered by astronomers; but when he questioned 
Faustus on these matters, Faustus frankly confessed his ignorance. "Even for this I liked him the 
better. For the modesty of a candid 


* Confessions, Bk. IV, Ch. XVI. 

* Ibid., Bk. V, Ch. III. 
a 

€ Ibid., Bk. V, Ch. VI. 
i 


- 349 - 


mind is even more attractive than the knowledge of those things which I desired; and such I 
found him, in all the more difficult and subtle questions." 

This sentiment is surprisingly liberal; one would not have expected it in that age. Nor is it quite 
in harmony with Saint Augustine's later attitude towards heretics. 

At this time he decided to go to Rome, not, he says, because there the income of a teacher was 
higher than at Carthage, but because he had heard that classes were more orderly. At Carthage, 
the disorders perpetrated by students were such that teaching was almost impossible; but at 
Rome, while there was less disorder, students fraudulently evaded payment. 

In Rome, he still associated with the ManichAjans, but with less conviction of their rightness. 
He began to think that the Academics were right in holding that men ought to doubt everything. 

3£-He still, however, agreed with the ManichAjans in thinking "that it is not we ourselves that 
sin, but that some other nature (what, I kn ow not) sins in us," and he believed Evil to be some 
kind of substance. This makes it clear that, before as after his conversion, the question of sin 
preoccupied him. 

After about a year in Rome, he was sent to Milan by the Prefect Symmachus, in response to a 
request from that city for a teacher of rhetoric. At Milan he became acquainted with Ambrose, 
" kn own to the whole world as among the best of men." He came to love Ambrose for his 
kindness, and to prefer the Catholic doctrine to that of the ManichAjans; but for a while he was 
held back by the scepticism he had leamt from the Academics, "to which philosophers 
notwithstanding, because they were without the saving name of Christ, I utterly refused to 
commit the care of my sick soul." a€j 

In Milan he was joined by his mother, who had a powerful influence in hastening the last steps 
to his conversion. She was a very earnest Catholic, and he writes of her always in a tone of 
reverence. She was the more important to him at this time, because Ambrose was too busy to 
converse with him privately. 


* Confessions, Bk. II, Ch. VII. 

* Ibid., Bk. V, Ch. X. 
a 

€ Ibid., Bk. V, Ch. XIV. 
i 


- 350 - 


There is a very interesting chapter Mn which he compares the Platonic philosophy with 
Christian doctrine. The Lord, he says, at this time provided him with "certain books of the 
Platonists, translated from Greek into Latin. And therein I read, not indeed in these words, but 
to the same purpose, enforced by many and diverse reasons, that ’In the beginning was the 
Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God: the same was in the beginning with 
God; all things were made by Him, and without Him was nothing made: that which was made 
by Him is life, and the life was the light of men, and the light shineth in the darkness, and the 
darkness comprehended it not.’ And that the soul of man, though it ’bears witness to the light,' 
yet itself 'is not that light,' but God, the Word of God, 'is that true light that lighteth every man 
that cometh into the world.’ And that 'He was in the world, and the world was made by Him, 
and the world knew Him not.' But that' He came unto His own, and His own received Him not; 
but as many as received Him, to them gave He power to become the sons of God, even to them 
that believe on His Name': this I read not there." He also did not read there that "The Word was 
made flesh, and dwelt among us"; nor that "He humbled Himself, and became obedient unto 
death, even the death of the Cross"; nor that "at the name of Jesus every knee should bow." 

Broadly speaking, he found in the Platonists the metaphysical doctrine of the Logos, but not the 
doctrine of the Incarnation and the consequent doctrine of human salvation. Something not 
unlike these doctrines existed in Orphism and the other mystery religions; but of this Saint 
Augustine appears to have been ignorant. In any case, none of these were connected with a 
comparatively recent historical event, as Christianity was. 

As against the ManichAjans, who were dualists, Augustine came to believe that evil originates 
not from some substance, but from perverseness of will. 

He found especial comfort in the writings of Saint Paul. s£_ 

At length, after passionate inward struggles, he was converted (386); he gave up his 
professorship, his mistress, and his bride, and, 


* Confessions, Bk. VII, Ch. IX. 


* Ibid., Bk. VII, Ch. XXL 


- 351 - 


after a brief period of meditation in retirement, was baptized by Saint Ambrose. His mother 
rejoiced, but died not long afterwards. In 388 he returned to Africa, where he remained for the rest 
of his life, fully occupied with his episcopal duties and with controversial writings against various 
heresies, Donatist, ManichAjan, and Pelagian, 

CHAPTER IV Saint Augustine's Philosophy and Theology 

SAINT AUGUSTINE was a very voluminous writer, mainly on theological subjects. Some of his 
controversial writing was topical, and lost interest through its very success; but some of it, 
especially what is concerned with the Pelagians, remained practically influential down to modern 
times. I do not propose to treat his works exhaustively, but only to discuss what seems to me 
important, either intrinsically or historically. I shall consider: 

First: his pure philosophy, particularly his theory of time; 

Second: his philosophy of history, as developed in The City of God ; 

Third: his theory of salvation, as propounded against the Pelagians. 

I. PURE PHILOSOPHY 

Saint Augustine, at most times, does not occupy himself with pure philosophy, but when he does 
he shows very great ability. He is the first of a long line whose purely speculative views are 
influenced by the necessity of agreeing with Scripture. This cannot be said of earlier Christian 
philosophers, e.g., Origen; in Origen, Christianity 

-352- 



and Platonism lie side by side, and do not interpenetrate. In Saint Augustine, on the other hand, 
original thinking in pure philosophy in stimulated by the fact that Platonism, in certain respects, is 
not in harmony with Genesis. 

The best purely philosophical work in Saint Augustine's writings is the eleventh book of the 
Confessions. Popular editions of the Confessions end with Book X, on the ground that what 
follows is uninteresting; it is uninteresting because it is good philosophy, not biography. Book XI 
is concerned with the problem: Creation having occurred as the first chapter of Genesis asserts, 
and as Augustine maintains against the ManichAjans, it should have occurred as soon as possible. 
So he imagines an objector arguing. 

The first point to realize, if his answer is to be understood, is that creation out of nothing, which 
was taught in the Old Testament, was an idea wholly foreign to Greek philosophy. When Plato 
speaks of creation, he imagines a primitive matter to which God gives fonn; and the same is true 
of Aristotle. Their God is an artificer or architect, rather than a Creator. Substance is thought of as 
eternal and uncreated; only form is due to the will of God. As against this view, Saint Augustine 
maintains, as every orthodox Christian must, that the world was created not from any certain 
matter, but from nothing. God created substance, not only order and arrangement. 

The Greek view, that creation out of nothing is impossible, has recurred at intervals in Christian 
times, and has led to pantheism. Pantheism holds that God and the world are not distinct, and that 
everything in the world is part of God. This view is developed most fully in Spinoza, but is one to 
which almost all mystics are attracted. It has thus happened, throughout the Christian centuries, 
that mystics have had difficulty in remaining orthodox, since they find it hard to believe that the 
world is outside God. Augustine, however, feels no difficulty on this point; Genesis is explicit, 
and that is enough for him. His view on this matter is essential to his theory of time. 

Why was the world not created sooner? Because there was no "sooner". Time was created when 
the world was created. God is eternal, in the sense of being timeless; in God there is no before and 
after, but only an eternal present. God’s eternity is exempt from the relation of time; all time is 
present to Him at once. He did not precede His own creation of time, for that would imply that He 
was 


- 353 - 



in time, whereas He stands eternally outside the stream of time. This leads Saint Augustine to a 
very admirable relativistic theory of time. 

"What, then, is time?" he asks. "If no one asks of me, I know; if I wish to explain to him who 
asks, I know not." Various difficulties perplex him. Neither past nor future, he says, but only the 
present, really is; the present is only a moment, and time can only be measured while it is 
passing. Nevertheless, there really is time past and future. We seem here to be led into 
contradictions. The only way Augustine can find to avoid these contradictions is to say that past 
and future can only be thought of as present: "past" must be identified with memory, and 
"future" with expectation, memory and expectation being both present facts. There are, he says, 
three times: "a present of things past, a present of things present, and a present of things future." 
"The present of things past is memory; the present of things present is sight; and the present of 
things future is expectation." f_To say that there are three times, past, present, and future, is a 
loose way of speaking. 

He realizes that he has not really solved all difficulties by this theory. "My soul yearns to know 
this most entangled enigma," he says, and he prays to God to enlighten him, assuring Him that 
his interest in the problem does not arise from vain curiosity. "I confess to Thee, O Lord, that I 
am as yet ignorant what time is." But the gist of the solution he suggests is that time is 

subjective: time is in the human mind, which expects, considers, and remembers. —It follows 
that there can be no time without a created being, a€j and that to speak of time before the 
Creation is meaningless. 

I do not myself agree with this theory, in so far as it makes time something mental. But it is 
clearly a very able theory, deserving to be seriously considered. I should go further, and say that 
it is a great advance on anything to be found on the subject in Greek philosophy. It contains a 
better and clearer statement than Kant's of the subjective theory of time— a theory which, since 
Kant, has been widely accepted among philosophers. 

The theory that time is only an aspect of our thoughts is one of the most extreme forms of that 
subjectivism which, as we have seen, 


* Confessions, Ch. XX. 

* Ibid., Ch. XXVIII. 
a 

€ Ibid., Ch. XXX. 
i 


- 354 - 


gradually increased in antiquity from the time of Protagoras and Socrates onwards. Its emotional 
aspect is obsession with sin, which came later than its intellectual aspects. Saint Augustine 
exhibits both kinds of subjectivism. Subjectivism led him to anticipate not only Kant's theory of 
time, but Descartes' cogito. In his Soliloquia he says: "You, who wish to know, do you know you 
are? I know it. Whence are you? I know not. Do you feel yourself single or multiple? I know not. 
Do you feel yourself moved? I know not. Do you know that you think? I do." This contains not 
only Descartes' cogito , but his reply to Gassendi's ambulo ergo sum. As a philosopher, therefore, 
Augustine deserves a high place. 


II. THE CITY OF GOD 

When, in 410, Rome was sacked by the Goths, the pagans, not unnaturally, attributed the disaster 
to the abandonment of the ancient gods. So long as Jupiter was worshipped, they said, Rome 
remained powerful; now that the Emperors have turned away from him, he no longer protects his 
Romans. This pagan argument called for an answer. The City of God, written gradually between 
412 and 427, was Saint Augustine's answer; but it took, as it proceeded, a far wider flight, and 
developed a complete Christian scheme of history, past, present, and future. It was an immensely 
influential book throughout the Middle Ages, especially in the struggles of the Church with 
secular princes. 

Like some other very great books, it composes itself, in the memory of those who have read it, 
into something better than at first appears on rereading. It contains a great deal that hardly anyone 
at the present day can accept, and its central thesis is somewhat obscured by excrescences 
belonging to his age. But the broad conception of a contrast between the City of this world and the 
City of God has remained an inspiration to many, and even now can be restated in nontheological 
terms. 

To omit detail in an account of the book, and concentrate on the central idea, would give an 
unduly favourable view; on the other hand, to concentrate on the detail would be to omit what is 
best and 


- 355 - 



most important. I shall endeavour to avoid both errors by first giving some account of the detail 
and then passing on to the general idea as it appeared in historical development. 

The book begins with considerations arising out of the sack of Rome, and designed to show that 
even worse things happened in preChristian times. Among the pagans who attribute the disaster to 
Christianity, there are many, the Saint says, who, during the sack, sought sanctuary in the 
churches, which the Goths, because they were Christians, respected. In the sack of Troy, on the 
contrary, Juno's temple afforded no protection, nor did the gods preserve the city from destruction. 
The Romans never spared temples in conquered cities; in this respect, the sack of Rome was 
milder than most, and the mitigation was a result of Christianity. 

Christians who suffered in the sack have no right to complain, for several reasons. Some wicked 
Goths may have prospered at their expense, but they will suffer hereafter: if all sin were punished 
on earth, there would be no need of the Last Judgement. What Christians endured would, if they 
were virtuous, turn to their edification, for saints, in the loss of things temporal, lose nothing of 
any value. It does not matter if their bodies lie unburied, because ravenous beasts cannot interfere 
with the resurrection of the body. 

Next comes the question of pious virgins who were raped during the sack. There were apparently 
some who held that these ladies, by no fault of their own, had lost the crown of virginity. This 
view the Saint very sensibly opposes. "Tush, another's lust cannot pollute thee." Chastity is a 
virtue of the mind, and is not lost by rape, but is lost by the intention of sin, even if unperformed. 
It is suggested that God permitted rapes because the victims had been too proud of their 
continence. It is wicked to commit suicide in order to avoid being raped; this leads to a long 
discussion of Lucretia, who ought not to have killed herself. Suicide is always a sin, except in the 
case of Samson. 

There is one proviso to the exculpation of virtuous women who are raped: they must not enjoy it. 
If they do, they are sinful. 

He comes next to the wickedness of the heathen gods. For example: "Your stage-plays, those 
spectacles of uncleanness, those licentious vanities, were not first brought up at Rome by the 
corruptions of the 


- 356 - 



men, but by the direct command of your gods." f_It would be better to worship a virtuous man, 
such as Scipio, than these immoral gods. But as for the sack of Rome, it need not trouble 
Christians, who have a sanctuary in the "pilgrim city of God." 

In this world, the two cities— the earthly and the heavenly— are commingled; but hereafter the 
predestinate and the reprobate will be separated. In this life, we cannot know who, even among 
our seeming enemies, are to be found ultimately among the elect. 

The most difficult part of the work, we are told, will consist in the refutation of the 
philosophers, with the best of whom Christians are to a large extent in agreement— for instance 

as to immortality and the creation of the world by God. — 

The philosophers did not throw over the worship of the heathen gods, and their moral 
instructions were weak because the gods were wicked. It is not suggested that the gods are mere 
fables; they are held by Saint Augustine to exist, but to be devils. They liked to have filthy 
stories told of them, because they wanted to injure men. Jupiter's deeds count more, with most 
pagans, than Plato's doctrines or Cato's opinions. " Plato, who would not allow poets to dwell in 
a well-governed city, showed that his sole worth was better than those gods, that desire to be 
honoured with stage-plays." a€j 

Rome was always wicked, from the rape of the Sabine women onwards. Many chapters are 
devoted to the sinfulness of Roman imperialism. Nor is it true that Rome did not suffer before 
the State became Christian; from the Gauls and the civil wars it suffered as much as from the 
Goths, and more. 

Astrology is not only wicked, but false; this may be proved from the different fortunes of twins, 
who have the same horoscope. AS The Stoic conception of Fate (which was connected with 
astrology) is mistaken, since angels and men have free will. It is true that God has 
foreknowledge of our sins, but we do not sin because of His foreknowledge. It is a mistake to 
suppose that virtue brings unhappiness, 


* The City of God, I, 31. 

A This argument is not original; it is derived from the academic sceptic Carneades. Cf. 
§ Cumont, Oriental Religions in Roman Paganism, p. 166. 

a 

^ Ibid., I, 35. 
a 

€ Ibid., II, 14. 
i 


- 357 - 


even in this world: Christian Emperors, if virtuous, have been happy even if not fortunate, and 
Constantine and Theodosius were fortunate as well; again, the Jewish kingdom lasted as long as 
the Jews adhered to the truth of religion. 

There is a very sympathetic account of Plato, whom he places above all other philosophers. All 
others are to give place to him: "Let Thales depart with his water, Anaximenes with the air, the 
Stoics with their fire, Epicurus with his atoms." ^_A11 these were materialists; Plato was not. 
Plato saw that God is not any bodily thing, but that all things have their being from God, and 
from something immutable. He was right, also, in saying that perception is not the source of 
truth. Platonists are the best in logic and ethics, and nearest to Christianity. "It is said that 
Plotinus, that lived but lately, understood Plato the best of any." As for Aristotle, he was Plato's 
inferior, but far above the rest. Both, however, said that all gods are good, and to be 
worshipped. 

As against the Stoics, who condemned all passion, Saint Augustine holds that the passions of 
Christians may be causes of virtue; anger, or pity, is not to be condemned per se, but we must 
inquire into its cause. 

Platonists are right about God, wrong about gods. They are also wrong in not acknowledging 
the Incarnation. 

There is a long discussion of angels and demons, which is connected with the Neoplatonists. 
Angels may be good or bad, but demons are always bad. To angels, knowledge of temporal 
things (though they have it) is vile. Saint Augustine holds with Plato that the sensible world is 
inferior to the eternal. 

Book XI begins the account of the nature of the City of God. The City of God is the society of 
the elect. Knowledge of God is obtained only through Christ. There are things that can be 
discovered by reason (as in the philosophers), but for all further religious knowledge we must 
rely on the Scriptures. We ought not to seek to understand time and space before the world was 
made: there was no time before the Creation, and there is no place where the world is not. 

Everything blessed is eternal, but not everything eternal is blessed — e.g., hell and Satan. God 
foreknew the sins of devils, but also their 


* The City of God, VIII, 5. 


- 358 - 


use in improving the universe as a whole which is analogous to antithesis in rhetoric. 

Origen errs in thinking that souls were given bodies as a punishment. If this were so, bad souls 
would have bad bodies; but devils, even the worst of them, have airy bodies, which are better 
than ours. 

The reason the world was created in six days is that six is a perfect number (i.e., equal to the 
sum of its factors). 

There are good and bad angels, but even the bad angels do not have an essence which is 
contrary to God. God's enemies are not so by nature, but by will. The vicious will has no 
efficient cause, but only a deficient one; it is not an effect, but a defect. 

The world is less than six thousand years old. History is not cyclic, as some philosophers 
suppose: "Christ died once for our sins." fi 

If our first parents had not sinned, they would not have died, but, because they sinned, all their 
posterity die. Eating the apple brought not only natural death, but eternal death, i.e., damnation. 

Prophyry is wrong in refusing bodies to saints in heaven. They will have better bodies than 
Adam’s before the fall; their bodies will be spiritual, but not spirits, and will not have weight. 
Men will have male bodies, and women female bodies, and those who have died in infancy will 
rise again with adult bodies. 

Adam’s sins would have brought all mankind to eternal death (i.e., damnation), but that God's 
grace has freed many from it. Sin came from the soul, not from the flesh. Platonists and 
ManichAjans both err in ascribing sin to the nature of the flesh, though Platonists are not so bad 
as ManichAjans. The punishment of all mankind for Adam's sin was just; for, as a result of this 

sin, man, that might have been spiritual in body, became carnal in mind. hfL 

This leads to a long and minute discussion of sexual lust, to which we are subject as part of our 
punishment for Adam's sin. This discussion is very important as revealing the psychology of 
asceticism; we must therefore go into it, although the Saint confesses that the theme is 
immodest. The theory advanced is as follows. 

It must be admitted that sexual intercourse in marriage is not sinful, provided the intention is to 
beget offspring. Yet even in marriage a virtuous man will wish that he could manage without 
lust. Even in 


* Romans VI. 

„ The City of God, XIV, 15. 


- 359 - 


marriage, as the desire for privacy shows, people are ashamed of sexual intercourse, because "this 
lawful act of nature is (from our first parents) accompanied with our penal shame." The cynics 
thought that one should be without shame, and Diogenes would have none of it, wishing to be in 
all things like a dog; yet even he, after one attempt, abandoned, in practice, this extreme of 
shamelessness. What is shameful about lust is its independence of the will. Adam and Eve, before 
the fall, could have had sexual intercourse without lust, though in fact they did not. 
Handicraftsmen, in the pursuit of their trade, move their hands without lust; similarly Adam, if 
only he had kept away from the apple-tree, could have performed the business of sex without the 
emotions that it now demands. The sexual members, like the rest of the body, would have obeyed 
the will. The need of lust in sexual intercourse is a punishment for Adam’s sin, but for which sex 
might have been divorced from pleasure. Omitting some physiological details which the translator 
has very properly left in the decent obscurity of the original Latin, the above is Saint Augustine's 
theory as regards sex. 

It is evident from the above that what makes the ascetic dislike sex is its independence of the will. 
Virtue, it is held, demands a complete control of the will over the body, but such control does not 
suffice to make the sexual act possible. The sexual act, therefore, seems inconsistent with a 
perfectly virtuous life. 

Ever since the Fall, the world has been divided into two cities, of which one shall reign eternally 
with God, the other shall be in eternal tonnent with Satan. Cain belongs to the city of the Devil, 
Abel to the City of God. Abel, by grace, and in virtue of predestination, was a pilgrim on earth and 
a citizen of heaven. The patriarchs belonged to the City of God. Discussion of the death of 
Methuselah brings Saint Augustine to the vexed question of the comparison of the Septuagint with 
the Vulgate. The data, as given in the Septuagint, lead to the conclusion that Methuselah survived 
the flood by fourteen years, which is impossible, since he was not in the Ark. The Vulgate, 
following the Hebrew manuscript, gives data from which it follows that he died the year of the 
flood. On this point, Saint Augustine holds that Saint Jerome and the Hebrew manuscript must be 
right. Some people maintained that the Jews had deliberately falsified the Hebrew 


- 360 - 



manuscript, out of malice towards the Christians; this hypothesis is rejected. On the other hand, 
the Septuagint must have been divinely inspired. The only conclusion is that Ptolemy's copyists 
made mistakes in transcribing the Septuagint. Speaking of the translations of the Old 
Testament, he says: "The Church has received that of the Seventy, as if there were no other, as 
many of the Greek Christians, using this wholly, know not whether there be or no. Our Latin 
translation is from this also, although one Jerome, a learned priest, and a great linguist, has 
translated the same Scriptures from the Hebrew into Latin. But although the Jews affirm his 
learned labour to be all truth, and avouch the Seventy to have oftentimes erred, yet the Churches 
of Christ hold no one man to be preferred before so many, especially being selected by the High 
Priest, for this work." He accepts the story of the miraculous agreement of the seventy 
independent translations, and considers this a proof that the Septuagint is divinely inspired. The 
Hebrew, however, is equally inspired. This conclusion leaves undecided the question as to the 
authority of Jerome's translation. Perhaps he might have been more decidedly on Jerome's side 
if the two Saints had not had a quarrel about Saint Peter's time-serving propensities. 

He gives a synchronism of sacred and profane history. We learn that Al'ncas came to Italy when 
Abdon a€ was judge in Israel, and that the last persecution will be under Antichrist, but its date 
is unknown. 

After an admirable chapter against judicial torture, Saint Augustine proceeds to combat the new 
Academicians, who hold all things to be doubtful. "The Church of Christ detests these doubts as 
madness, having a most certain knowledge of the things it apprehends." We should believe in 
the truth of the Scriptures. He goes on to explain that there is no true virtue apart from true 
religion. Pagan virtue is "prostituted with the influence of obscene and filthy devils." What 
would be virtues in a Christian are vices in a pagan. "Those things which she [the soul] seems 
to account virtues, and thereby to sway her affections, if they be not all referred unto God, are 
indeed vices rather than virtues." They that are not of this society (the Church) 


* Galatians II, 11-14. 

^ Of Abdon we know only that he had forty sons and thirty nephews, and that all these 
€ seventy rode donkeys ( Judges XII, 14). 


- 361 - 


shall suffer eternal misery. "In our conflicts here on earth, either the pain is victor, and so death 
expels the sense of it, or nature conquers, and expels the pain. But there, pain shall afflict 
eternally, and nature shall suffer eternally, both enduring to the continuance of the inflicted 
punishment" (Ch. 28). 

There are two resurrections, that of the soul at death, and that of the body at the Last Judgement. 
After a discussion of various difficulties concerning the millennium, and the subsequent doings of 
Gog and Magog, he comes to a text in II Thessalonians (II, 11, 12): "God shall send them strong 
delusion, that they should believe a lie, that all they might be damned who believed not the truth, 
but had pleasure in unrighteousness." Some people might think it unjust that the Omnipotent 
should first deceive them, and then punish them for being deceived; but to Saint Augustine this 
seems quite in order. "Being condemned, they are seduced, and, being seduced, condemned. But 
their seducement is by the secret judgement of God, justly secret, and secretly just; even His that 
hath judged continually, ever since the world began." St. Augustine holds that God divided 
mankind into the elect and the reprobate, not because of their merits or demerits, but arbitrarily. 
All alike deserve damnation, and therefore the reprobate have no ground of complaint. From the 
above passage of Saint Paul, it appears that they are wicked because they are reprobate, not 
reprobate because they are wicked. 

After the resurrection of the body, the bodies of the damned will burn eternally without being 
consumed. In this there is nothing strange; it happens to the salamander and Mount Etna. Devils, 
though incorporeal, can be burnt by corporeal fire. Hell's tonnents are not purifying, and will not 
be lessened by the intercessions of saints. Origen erred in thinking hell not eternal. Heretics, and 
sinful Catholics, will be damned. 

The book ends with a description of the Saints' vision of God in heaven, and of the eternal felicity 
of the City of God. 

From the above summary, the importance of the work may not be clear. What was influential was 
the separation of Church and State, with the clear implication that the State could only be part of 
the City of God by being submissive towards the Church in all religious matters. This has been the 
doctrine of the Church ever since. All 


- 362 - 



through the Middle Ages, during the gradual rise of the papal power, and throughout the 
conflict between Pope and Emperor, Saint Augustine supplied the Western Church with the 
theoretical justification of its policy. The Jewish State, in the legendary time of the Judges, and 
in the historical period after the return from the Babylonian captivity, had been a theocracy; the 
Christian State should imitate it in this respect. The weakness of the emperors, and of most 
Western medieval monarchs, enabled the Church, to a great extent, to realize the ideal of the 
City of God. In the East, where the emperor was strong, this development never took place, and 
the Church remained much more subject to the State than it became in the West. 

The Reformation, which revived Saint Augustine's doctrine of salvation, threw over his 
theocratic teaching, and became Erastian, ^largely owing to the practical exigencies of the fight 
with Catholicism. But Protestant Erastianism was half-hearted, and the most religious among 
Protestants were still influenced by Saint Augustine. Anabaptists, Fifth Monarchy Men, and 
Quakers took over a part of his doctrine, but laid less stress on the Church. He held to 
predestination, and also to the need of baptism for salvation; these two doctrines do not 
harmoni z e well, and the extreme Protestants threw over the latter. But their eschatology 
remained Augustinian. 

The City of God contains little that is fundamentally original. The eschatology is Jewish in 
origin, and came into Christianity mainly through the Book of Revelation. The doctrine of 
predestination and election is Pauline, though Saint Augustine gave it a much fuller and more 
logical development than is to be found in the Epistles. The distinction between sacred and 
profane history is quite clearly set forth in the Old Testament. What Saint Augustine did was to 
bring these elements together, and to relate them to the history of his own time, in such a way 
that the fall of the Western Empire, and the subsequent period of confusion, could be 
assimilated by Christians without any unduly severe trial of their faith. 

The Jewish pattern of history, past and future, is such as to make a powerful appeal to the 
oppressed and unfortunate at all times. Saint Augustine adapted this pattern to Christianity, 
Marx to Social- 


* Erastianism is the doctrine that the Church should be subiect to the State. 

- 363 - 

ism. To understand Marx psychologically, one should use the following dictionary: 
Yahweh=Dialectical Materialism 
The Messiah= Marx 
The Elect=The Proletariat 
The Church=The Communist Party 
The Second Coming=The Revolution 
Hell=Punishment of the Capitalists 
The Millennium=The Communist Commonwealth 


The terms on the left give the emotional content of the terms on the right, and it is this 
emotional content, familiar to those who have had a Christian or a Jewish upbringing, that 
makes Marx's eschatology credible. A similar dictionary could be made for the Nazis, but their 
conceptions are more purely Old Testament and less Christian than those of Marx, and their 
Messiah is more analagous to the Maccabees than to Christ. 

III. THE PELAGIAN CONTROVERSY 

Much of the most influential part of Saint Augustine's theology was concerned in combating the 
Pelagian heresy. Pelagius was a Welshman, whose real name was Morgan, which means "man 
of the sea," as "Pelagius" does in Greek. He was a cultivated and agreeable ecclesiastic, less 
fanatical than many of his contemporaries. He believed in free will, questioned the doctrine of 
original sin, and thought that, when men act virtuously, it is by virtue of their own moral effort. 
If they act rightly, and are orthodox, they go to heaven as a reward, of their virtues. 

These views, though they may now seem commonplace, caused, at the time, a great commotion, 
and were, largely through Saint Augustine's efforts, declared heretical. They had, however, a 
considerable temporary success. Augustine had to write to the patriarch of Jerusalem to warn 
him against the wily heresiarch, who had persuaded many Eastern theologians to adopt his 
views. Even after his condemnation, other people, called semi-Pelagians, advocated weakened 
forms of his doctrines. It was a long time before the purer teaching of the Saint was completely 
victorious, especially in France, 

- 364 - 



where the final condemnation of the semi-Pelagian heresy took place at the Council of Orange in 
529 . 


Saint Augustine taught that Adam, before the Fall, had had free will, and could have abstained 
from sin. But as he and Eve ate the apple, corruption entered into them, and descended to all their 
posterity, none of whom can, of their own power, abstain from sin. Only God's grace enables men 
to be virtuous. Since we all inherit Adam's sin, we all deserve eternal damnation. All who die 
unbaptized, even infants, will go to hell and suffer unending torment. We have no reason to 
complain of this, since we are all wicked. (In the Confessions, the Saint enumerates the crimes of 
which he was guilty in the cradle.) But by God's free grace certain people, among those who have 
been baptized, are chosen to go to heaven; these are the elect. They do not go to heaven because 
they are good; we are all totally depraved, except in so far as God's grace, which is only bestowed 
on the elect, enables us to be otherwise. No reason can be given why some are saved and the rest 
damned; this is due to God's unmotived choice. Damnation proves God’s justice; salvation His 
mercy. Both equally display His goodness. 

The arguments in favour of this ferocious doctrine— which was revived by Calvin, and has since 
then not been held by the Catholic Church— are to be found in the writings of Saint Paul, 
particularly the Epistle to the Romans. These are treated by Augustine as a lawyer treats the law: 
the interpretation is able, and the texts are made to yield their utmost meaning. One is persuaded, 
at the end, not that Saint Paul believed what Augustine deduces, but that, taking certain texts in 
isolation, they do imply just what he says they do. It may seem odd that the damnation of 
unbaptized infants should not have been thought shocking, but should have been attributed to a 
good God. The conviction of sin, however, so dominated him that he really believed new-bom 
children to be limbs of Satan. A great deal of what is most ferocious in the medieval Church is 
traceable to his gloomy sense of universal guilt. 

There is only one intellectual difficulty that really troubles Saint Augustine. This is not that it 
seems a pity to have created Man, since the immense majority of the human race are predestined 
to eternal torment. What troubles him is that, if original sin is inherited from Adam, as Saint Paul 
teaches, the soul, as well as the body, must be 


- 365 - 



propagated by the parents, for sin is of the soul, not the body. He sees difficulties in this doctrine, 
but says that, since Scripture is silent, it cannot be necessary to salvation to arrive at a just view on 
the matter. He therefore leaves it undecided. 

It is strange that the last men of intellectual eminence before the dark ages were concerned, not 
with saving civilization or expelling the barbarians or refonning the abuses of the administration, 
but with preaching the merit of virginity and the damnation of unbaptized infants. Seeing that 
these were the preoccupations that the Church handed on to the converted barbarians, it is no 
wonder that the succeeding age surpassed almost all other fully historical periods in cruelty and 
superstition. 


CHAPTER V The Fifth and Sixth Centuries 

THE fifth century was that of the barbarian invasion and the fall of the Western Empire. After the 
death of Augustine in 430, there was little philosophy; it was a century of destructive action, 
which, however, largely determined the lines upon which Europe was to be developed. It was in 
this century that the English invaded Britain, causing it to become England; it was also in this 
century that the Frankish invasion turned Gaul into France, and that the Vandals invaded Spain, 
giving their name to Andalusia. Saint Patrick, during the middle years of the century, converted 
the Irish to Christianity. Throughout the Western World, rough Germanic kingdoms succeeded the 
centralized bureaucracy of the Empire. The imperial post ceased, the great roads fell into decay, 
war put an end to large-scale commerce, and life again became local both politically and 
economically. Centralized authority was preserved only in the Church, and there with much 
difficulty. 

Of the Germanic tribes that invaded the Empire in the fifth century, the most important were the 
Goths. They were pushed west- 


- 366 - 



ward by the Huns, who attacked them from the East. At first they tried to conquer the Eastern 
Empire, but were defeated; then they turned upon Italy. Since Diocletian, they had been employed 
as Roman mercenaries; this had taught them more of the art of war than barbarians would 
otherwise have known. Alaric, King of the Goths, sacked Rome in 410, but died the same year. 
Odovaker, King of the Ostrogoths, put an end to the Western Empire in 476, and reigned until 
493, when he was treacherously murdered by another Ostrogoth, Theodoric, who was King of 
Italy until 526. Of him I shall have more to say shortly. He was important both in history and 
legend; in the Niebelungenlied he appears as "Dietrich von Bern" ("Bern" being Verona). 

Meanwhile the Vandals established themselves in Africa, the Visigoths in the south of France, and 
the Franks in the north. 

In the middle of the Germanic invasion came the inroads of the Huns under Attila. The Huns were 
of Mongol race, and yet they were often allied with the Goths. At the crucial moment, however, 
when they invaded Gaul in 45 1, they had quarrelled with the Goths; the Goths and Romans 
together defeated them in that year at Chalons. Attila then turned against Italy, and thought of 
marching on Rome, but Pope Leo dissuaded him, pointing out that Alaric had died after sacking 
Rome. His forbearance, however, did him no service, for he died in the following year. After his 
death the power of the Huns collapsed. 

During this period of confusion the Church was troubled by a complicated controversy on the 
Incarnation. The protagonists in the debates were two ecclesiastics, Cyril and Nestorius, of whom, 
more or less by accident, the former was proclaimed a saint and the latter a heretic. Saint Cyril 
was patriarch of Alexandria from about 412 till his death in 444; Nestorius was patriarch of 
Constantinople. The question at issue was the relation of Christ's divinity to His humanity. Were 
there two Persons, one human and one divine? This was the view held by Nestorius. If not, was 
there only one nature, or were there two natures in one person, a human nature and a divine 
nature? These questions roused, in the fifth century, an almost incredible degree of passion and 
fury. "A secret and incurable discord was cherished between those who were most apprehensive of 
confound- 


- 367 - 



ing, and those who were most fearful of separating, the divinity and the humanity of Christ." 

Saint Cyril, the advocate of unity, was a man of fanatical zeal. He used his position as patriarch 
to incite pogroms of the very large Jewish colony in Alexandria. His chief claim to fame is the 
lynching of Hypatia, a distinguished lady who, in an age of bigotry, adhered to the Neoplatonic 
philosophy and devoted her talents to mathematics. She was "tom from her chariot, stripped 
naked, dragged to the church, and inhumanly butchered by the hands of Peter the Reader and a 
troop of savage and merciless fanatics: her flesh was scraped from her bones with sharp oyster- 
shells and her quivering limbs were delivered to the flames. The just progress of inquiry and 
punishment was stopped by seasonable gifts." f_A ftcr this, Alexandria was no longer troubled 
by philosophers. 

Saint Cyril was pained to learn that Constantinople was being led astray by the teaching of its 
patriarch Nestorius, who maintained that there were two persons in Christ, one human and one 
divine. On this ground Nestorius objected to the new practice of calling the Virgin "Mother of 
God"; she was, he said, only the mother of the human Person, while the divine Person, who was 
God, had no mother. On this question the Church was divided: roughly speaking, bishops east 
of Suez favoured Nestorius, while those west of Suez favoured Saint Cyril. A council was 
summoned to meet at Ephesus in 43 1 to decide the question. The Western bishops arrived first, 
and proceeded to lock the doors against late-comers and decide in hot haste for Saint Cyril, who 
presided. "This episcopal tumult, at the distance of thirteen centuries, assumes the venerable 

aspect of the Third A’cumenical Council." — 

As a result of this Council, Nestorius was condemned as a heretic. He did not recant, but was 
the founder of the Nestorian sect, which had a large following in Syria and throughout the East. 
Some centuries later, Nestorianism was so strong in China that it seemed to have a chance of 
becoming the established religion. Nestorians were found in India by the Spanish and 
Portuguese missionaries in the sixteenth century. The persecution of Nestorianism by the 
Catholic 


* Gibbon, op. cit., Chap. XL VII. 


a 

^ Ibid. 


- 368 - 


government of Constantinople caused disaffection which helped the Mohammedans in their 
conquest of Syria. 

The tongue of Nestorius, which by its eloquence had seduced so many, was eaten by worms— so at 
least we are assured. 

Ephesus had learnt to substitute the Virgin for Artemis, but had still the same intemperate zeal for 
its goddess as in the time of Saint Paul. It was said that the Virgin was buried there. In 449, after 
the death of Saint Cyril, a synod at Ephesus tried to carry the triumph further, and thereby fell into 
the heresy opposite to that of Nestorius; this is called the Monophysite heresy, and maintains that 
Christ has only one nature. If Saint Cyril had still been alive, he would certainly have supported 
this view, and have become heretical. The Emperor supported the synod, but the Pope repudiated 
it. At last Pope Leo-the same Pope who turned Attila from attacking Rome— in the year of the 
battle of Chalons secured the summoning of an cecumenical Council at Chalcedon in 45 1 , which 
condemned the Monophysites and finally decided the orthodox doctrine of the Incarnation. The 
Council of Ephesus had decided that there is only one Person of Christ, but the Council of 
Chalcedon decided that He exists in two natures, one human and one divine. The influence of the 
Pope was paramount in securing this decision. 

The Monophysites, like the Nestorians, refused to submit. Egypt, almost to a man, adopted their 
heresy, which spread up the Nile and as far as Abyssinia. The heresy of Egypt, like the opposite 
heresy of Syria, facilitated the Arab conquest. The heresy of the Abyssinians was given by 
Mussolini as one of his reasons for conquering them. 

During the sixth century, there were four men of great importance in the history of culture: 
Boethius, Justinian, Benedict, and Gregory the Great. They will be my chief concern in the 
remainder of this chapter and in the next. 

The Gothic conquest of Italy did not put an end to Roman civilization. Under Theodoric, king of 
Italy and of the Goths, the civil administration of Italy was entirely Roman; Italy enjoyed peace 
and religious toleration (till near the end); the king was both wise and vigorous. He appointed 
consuls, preserved Roman law, and kept up the Senate: when in Rome, his first visit was to Senate 
house. 

Though an Arian, Theodoric was on good terms with the Church until his last years. In 523, the 
Emperor Justin proscribed Arianism, 


- 369 - 



and this annoyed Theodoric. He had reason for fear, since Italy was Catholic, and was led by 
theological sympathy to side with the Emperor. He believed, rightly or wrongly, that there was a 
plot involving men in his own government. This led him to imprison and execute his minister, the 
senator Boethius, whose Consolations of Philosophy was written while he was in prison. 

Boethius is a singular figure. Throughout the Middle Ages he was read and admired, regarded 
always as a devout Christian, and treated almost as if he had been one of the Fathers. Yet his 
Consolations of Philosophy, written in 524 while he was awaiting execution, is purely Platonic; it 
does not prove that he was not a Christian, but it does show that pagan philosophy had a much 
stronger hold on him then Christian theology. Some theological works, especially one on the 
Trinity, which are attributed to him, are by many authorities considered to be spurious; but it was 
probably owing to them that the Middle Ages were able to regard him as orthodox, and to imbibe 
from him much Platonism which would otherwise have been viewed with suspicion. 

The work is an alternation of verse and prose: Boethius, in his own person, speaks in prose, while 
Philosophy answers in verse. There is at certain resemblance to Dante, who was no doubt 
influenced by him in the Vita Nuova. 

The Consolations, which Gibbon rightly calls a "golden volume," begins by the statement that 
Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle are the true philosophers; Stoics, Epicureans, and the rest are 
usurpers, whom the profane multitude mistook for the friends of philosophy. Boethius says he 
obeyed the Pythagorean command to "follow God" (not the Christian command). Happiness, 
which is the same thing as blessedness, is the good, not pleasure. Friendship is a "most sacred 
thing." There is much morality that agrees closely with Stoic doctrine, and is in fact largely taken 
from Seneca. There is a summary, in verse, of the beginning of the Timaeus. This is followed by a 
great deal of purely Platonic metaphysics. Imperfection, we are told, is a lack, implying the 
existence of a perfect pattern. He adopts the privative theory of evil. He then passes on to a 
pantheism which should have shocked Christians, but for some reason did not. Blessedness and 
God, he says, are both the chiefest good, and are therefore identical. "Men are made happy by the 
obtaining of divinity." "They who obtain divinity become gods. Wherefore every one that is happy 


- 370 - 



is a god, but by nature there is only one God, but there may be many by participation." "The sum, 
origin, and cause of all that is sought after is rightly thought to be goodness." "The substance of 
God consisteth in nothing else but in goodness." Can God do evil? No. Therefore evil is nothing, 
since God can do everything. Virtuous men are always powerful, and bad men always weak; for 
both desire the good, but only the virtuous get it. The wicked are more unfortunate if they escape 
punishment than if they suffer it. (Note that this could not be said of punishment in hell.) "In wise 
men there is no place for hatred." 

The tone of the book is more like that of Plato than that of Plotinus. There is no trace of the 
superstition or morbidness of the age, no obsession with sin, no excessive straining after the 
unattainable. There is perfect philosophic calm— so much that, if the book had been written in 
prosperity, it might almost have been called smug. Written when it was, in prison under sentence 
of death, it is as admirable as the last moments of the Platonic Socrates. 

One does not find a similar outlook until after Newton. I will quote in extenso one poem from the 
book, which, in its philosophy, is not unlike Pope Essay on Man. 

If Thou wouldst see God's laws with purest mind, Thy sight on heaven must fixed be, Whose 
settled course the stars in peace doth bind. The sun's bright fire Stops not his sister's team, Nor 
doth the northern bear desire Within the ocean's wave to hide her beam. Though she behold The 
other stars there couching, Yet she incessantly is rolled About high heaven, the ocean never 
touching. The evening light With certain course doth show The coming of the shady night, And 
Lucifer before the day doth go. This mutual love Courses eternal makes, 

- 371 - 

And from the starry spheres above All cause of war and dangerous discord takes. This sweet 
consent In equal bands doth tie The nature of each element So that the moist things yield unto the 
dry. The piercing cold With flames doth friendship heap The trembling fire the highest place doth 
hold, And the gross earth sinks down into the deep. The flowery year Breathes odours in the 
spring, The scorching summer com doth bear The autumn fruit from laden trees doth bring. The 
falling rain Doth winter's moisture give. These rules thus nourish and maintain All creatures 
which we see on earth to live. And when they die. These bring them to their end, While their 
Creator sits on high, Whose hand the reins of the whole world doth bend. He as their king Rules 
them with lordly might. From Him they rise, flourish, and spring, He as their law and judge 
decides their right. Those things whose course Most swiftly glides away His might doth often 
backward force, And suddenly their wandering motion stay. Unless his strength Their violence 
should bound, And them which else would run at length, Should bring within the compass of a 
round, That firm decree Which now doth all adorn Would soon destroyed and broken be, Things 
being far from their beginning borne. This powerful love Is common unto all. 


- 372 - 



Which for desire of good do move Back to the springs from whence they first did fall. No worldly 
thing Can a continuance have Unless love back again it bring Unto the cause which first the 
essence gave. 

Boethius was, until the end, a friend of Theodoric. His father was consul, he was consul, and so 
were his two sons. His father-in-law Symmachus (probably grandson of the one who had a 
controversy with Ambrose about the statue of Victory) was an important man in the court of the 
Gothic king. Theodoric employed Boethius to reform the coinage, and to astonish less 
sophisticated barbarian kings with such devices as sun-dials and water-clocks. It may be that his 
freedom from superstition was not so exceptional in Roman aristocratic families as elsewhere; but 
its combination with great learning and zeal for the public good was unique in that age. During the 
two centuries before his time and the ten centuries after it, I cannot think of any European man of 
learning so free from superstition and fanaticism. Nor are his merits merely negative; his survey is 
lofty, disinterested, and sublime. He would have been remarkable in any age; in the age in which 
he lived, he is utterly amazing. 

The medieval reputation of Boethius was partly due to his being regarded as a martyr to Arian 
persecution— a view which began two or three hundred years after his death. In Pavia, he was 
regarded as a saint, but in fact he was not canonized. Though Cyril was a saint, Boethius was not. 

Two years after the execution of Boethius, Theodoric died. In the next year, Justinian became 
Emperor. He reigned until 565, and in this long time managed to do much hann and some good. 
He is of course chiefly famous for his Digest. But I shall not venture on this topic, which is one 
for the lawyers. He was a man of deep piety, which he signalized, two years after his accession, by 
closing the schools of philosophy in Athens, where paganism still reigned. The dispossessed 
philosophers betook themselves to Persia, where the king received them kindly. But they were 
shocked— more so, says Gibbon, than became philosophers— by the Persian practices of polygamy 
and incest, so they returned home again, and faded into obscurity. Three 


- 373 - 



years after this exploit ( 532), Justinian embarked upon another, more worthy of praise— the 
building of St. Sophia. I have never seen St. Sophia, but I have seen the beautiful contemporary 
mosaics at Ravenna, including portraits of Justinian and his empress Theodora. Both were very 
pious, though Theodora was a lady of easy virtue whom he had picked up in the circus. What is 
even worse, she was inclined to be a Monophysite. 

But enough of scandal. The Emperor himself, I am happy to say, was of impeccable orthodoxy, 
except in the matter of the "Three Chapters." This was a vexatious controversy. The Council of 
Chalcedon had pronounced orthodox three Fathers suspected of Nestorianism; Theodora, along 
with many others, accepted all the other decrees of the council, but not this one. The Western 
Church stood by everything decided by the Council, and the empress was driven to persecute the 
Pope. Justinian adored her, and after her death in 548, she became to him what the dead Prince 
Consort was to Queen Victoria. So in the end he lapsed into heresy. A contemporary historian 
( Evagrius) writes: "Having since the end of his life received the wages of his misdeeds, he has 
gone to seek the justice which was his due before the judgment-seat of hell." 

Justinian aspired to reconquer as much as possible of the Western Empire. In 535 he invaded Italy, 
and at first had quick success against the Goths. The Catholic population welcomed him, and he 
came as representing Rome against the barbarians. But the Goths rallied, and the war lasted 
eighteen years, during which Rome, and Italy generally, suffered far more than in the barbarian 
invasion. 

Rome was five times captured, thrice by Byzantines, twice by Goths, and sank to a small town. 
The'same sort of thing happened in Africa, which Justinian also more or less reconquered. At first 
his armies were welcomed; then it was found that Byzantine administration was corrupt and 
Byzantine taxes were ruinous. In the end, many people wished the Goths and Vandals back. The 
Church, however, until his last years, was steadily on the side of the Emperor, because of his 
orthodoxy. He did not attempt the reconquest of Gaul, partly because of distance, but partly also 
because the Franks were orthodox. 

In 568, three years after Justinian's death, Italy was invaded by a new and very fierce German 
tribe, the Lombards. Wars between them and the Byzantines continued intennittently for two 
hundred years, 


- 374 - 



until nearly the time of Charlemagne. The Byzantines held gradually less and less of Italy; in the 
South, they had also to face the Saracens. Rome remained nominally subject to them, and the 
popes treated the Eastern emperors with deference. But in most parts of Italy the emperors, after 
the coming of the Lombards, had very little authority or even none at all. It was this period that 
ruined Italian civilization. It was refugees from the Lombards who founded Venice, not, as 
tradition avers, fugitives from Attila. 

CHAPTER VI Saint Benedict and Gregory the Great 

IN the general decay of civilization that came about during the incessant wars of the sixth and 
succeeding centuries, it was above all the Church that preserved whatever survived of the culture 
of ancient Rome. The Church performed this work very imperfectly, because fanaticism and 
superstition prevailed among even the greatest ecclesiastics of the time, and secular learning was 
thought wicked. Nevertheless, ecclesiastical institutions created a solid framework, within which, 
in later times, a revival of learning and civilized arts became possible. 

In the period with which we are concerned, three of the activities of the Church call for special 
notice: first, the monastic movement; second, the influence of the papacy, especially under 
Gregory the Great; third, the conversion of the heathen barbarians by means of missions. I will say 
something about each of these in succession. 

The monastic movement began simultaneously in Egypt and Syria about the beginning of the 
fourth century. It had two forms, that of solitary hermits, and that of monasteries. Saint Anthony, 
the first of the hennits, was bom in Egypt about 250, and withdrew from the 

-375- 



world about 270. For fifteen years he lived alone in a hut near his home; then, for twenty years, 
in remote solitude in the desert. But his fame spread, and multitudes longed to hear him preach. 
Accordingly, about 305, he came forth to teach, and to encourage the hermit’s life. Fie practised 
extreme austerities, reducing food, drink, and sleep to the minimum required to support life. 

The devil constantly assailed him with lustful visions, but he manfully withstood the malign 
diligence of Satan. By the end of his life, the Thebaid ^_was full of hermits who had been 
inspired by his example and his precepts. 

A few years later-about 3 15 or 320— another Egyptian, Pachomius, founded the first monastery. 
Here the monks had a common life, without private property, with communal meals and 
communal religious observations. It was in this form, rather than in that of Saint Anthony, that 
monasticism conquered the Christian world. In the monasteries derived from Pachomius, the 
monks did much work, chiefly agricultural, instead of spending the whole of their time in 
resisting the temptations of the flesh. 

At about the same time, monasticism sprang up in Syria and Mesopotamia. Here asceticism was 
carried to even greater lengths than in Egypt. Saint Simeon Stylites and the other pillar hermits 
were Syrian. It was from the East that monasticism came to Greek-speaking countries, chiefly 
owing to Saint Basil (about 360). His monasteries were less ascetic; they had orphanages, and 
schools for boys (not only for such as intended to become monks). 

At first, monasticism was a spontaneous movement, quite outside Church organization. It was 
Saint Athanasius who reconciled ecclesiastics to it. Partly as a result of his influence, it came to 
be the rule that monks should be priests. It was he also, while he was in Rome in 339, who 
introduced the movement into the West. Saint Jerome did much to promote it, and Saint 
Augustine introduced it into Africa. Saint Martin of Tours inaugurated monasteries in Gaul, 
Saint Patrick in Ireland. The monastery of Iona was founded by Saint Columba in 566. In early 
days, before monks had been fitted into the ecclesiastical organization, they had been a source 
of disorder. To begin with, there was no way of discriminating between genuine ascetics and 
men who being destitute, found monastic establishments 


* The desert near Egyptian Thebes. 


- 376 - 


comparatively luxurious. Then again there was the difficulty that the monks gave a turbulent 
support to their favourite bishop, causing synods (and almost causing councils) to fall into heresy. 
The synod (not the council) of Ephesus, which decided for the Monophysites, was under a 
monkish reign of terror. But for the resistance of the Pope, the victory of the Monophysites might 
have been pennanent. In later time, such disorders no longer occurred. 

There seem to have been nuns before there were monks— as early as the middle of the third 
century. Some shut themselves up in tombs. 

Cleanliness was viewed with abhorrence. Lice were called "pearls of God," and were a mark of 
saintliness. Saints, male and female, would boast that water had never touched their feet except 
when they had to cross rivers. In later centuries, monks served many useful purposes: they were 
skilled agriculturists, and some of them kept alive or revived learning. But in the beginning, 
especially in the eremitic section, there was none of this. Most monks did no work, never read 
anything except what religion prescribed, and conceived virtue in an entirely negative manner, as 
abstention from sin, especially the sins of the flesh. Saint Jerome, it is true, took his library with 
him into the desert, but he came to think that this had been a sin. 

In Western monasticism, the most important name is that of Saint Benedict, the founder of the 
Benedictine Order. He was bom about 480, near Spoleto, of a noble Umbrian family; at the age of 
twenty, he fled from the luxuries and pleasures of Rome tothe solitude of a cave, where he lived 
for three years. After this period, his life was less solitary, and about the year 520 he founded the 
famous monastery of Monte Cassino, for which he drew up the "Benedictine rule." This was 
adapted to Western climates, and demanded less austerity than had been common among Egyptian 
and Syrian monks. There had been an unedifying competition in ascetic extravagance, the most 
extreme practitioner being considered the most holy. To this Saint Benedict put an end, decreeing 
that austerities going beyond the rule could only be practised by pennission of the abbot. The 
abbot was given great power; he was elected for life, and had (within the Rule and the limits of 
orthodoxy) an almost despotic control over his monks, who were no longer allowed, as 
previously, to leave their monastery for another if they felt so inclined. In later times, Bene- 


- 377 - 



dictines have been remarkable for learning, but at first all their reading was devotional. 

Organizations have a life of their own, independent of the intentions of their founders. Of this 
fact, the most striking example is the Catholic Church, which would astonish Jesus, and even 
Paul. The Benedictine Order is a lesser example. The monks take a vow of poverty, obedience, 
and chastity. As to this, Gibbon remarks: "I have somewhere heard or read the frank confession 
of a Benedictine abbot: 'My vow of poverty has given me an hundred thousand crowns a year; 
my vow of obedience has raised me to the ra nk of a sovereign prince.' I forget the consequences 
of his vow of chastity." iCThe departures of the Order from the founder's intentions were, 
however, by no means all regrettable. This is true, in particular, of learning. The library of 
Monte Cassino is famous, and in various ways the world is much indebted to the scholarly 
tastes of later Benedictines. 

Saint Benedict lived at Monte Cassino from its foundation until his death in 543. The 
monastery was sacked by the Lombards, shortly before Gregory the Great, himself a 
Benedictine, became Pope. The monks fled to Rome; but when the fury of the Lombards had 
abated, they returned to Monte Cassino. 

From the dialogues of Pope Gregory the Great, written in 593, we learn much about Saint 
Benedict. He was "brought up at Rome in the study of humanity. But forasmuch as he saw 
many by the reason of such learning to fall to dissolute and lewd life, he drew back his foot, 
which he had as it were now set forth into the world, lest, entering too far in acquaintance 
therewith, he likewise might have fallen into that dangerous and godless gulf: wherefore, giving 
over his book, and forsaking his father's house and wealth, with a resolute mind only to serve 
God, he sought for some place, where he might attain to the desire of his holy purpose: and in 
this sort he departed, instructed with learned ignorance, and furnished with unlearned wisdom." 

He immediately acquired the power to work miracles. The first of these was the mending of a 
broken sieve by means of prayer. The townsmen hung the sieve over the church door, and it 
"continued there many years after, even to these very troubles of the Lombards." Abandoning 
the sieve, he went to his cave, u nkn own to all but one 


* Op. cit., XXXVII, note 57. 


- 378 - 


friend, who secretly supplied him with food let down by a rope, to which a bell was tied to let the 
saint know when his dinner had come. But Satan threw a stone at the rope, breaking both it and 
the bell. Nevertheless, the enemy of mankind was foiled in his hope of disrupting the Saint's food- 
supply. 

When Benedict had been as long in the cave as God's purposes required, our Lord appeared on 
Easter Sunday to a certain priest, revealed the hermit's whereabouts, and bade him share his Easter 
feast with the saint. About the same time certain shepherds found him. "At the first, when they 
espied him through the bushes, and saw his apparel made of skins, they verily thought that it had 
been some beast: but after they were acquainted with the servant of God, many of them were by 
his means converted from their beastly life to grace, piety, and devotion." 

Like other hennits, Benedict suffered from the temptations of the flesh. "A certain woman there 
was which some time he had seen, the memory of which the wicked spirit put into his mind, and 
by the memory of her did so mightily inflame with concupiscence the soul of God's servant, which 
did so increase that, almost overcome with pleasure, he was of mind to have forsaken the 
wilderness. But suddenly, assisted with God’s grace, he came to himself; and seeing many thick 
briers and nettle bushes to grow hard by, off he cast his apparel, and threw himself into the midst 
of them, and there wallowed so long that, when he rose up, all his flesh was pitifully tom: and so 
by the wounds of his body, he cured the wounds of his soul." 

His fame being spread abroad, the monks of a certain monastery, whose abbot had lately died, 
besought him to accept the succession. He did so, and insisted upon observance of strict virtue, so 
that the monks, in a rage, decided to poison him with a glass of poisoned wine. He, however, 
made the sign of the cross over the glass, whereupon it broke in pieces. So he returned to the 
wilderness. 

The miracle of the sieve was not the only practically useful one perfonned by Saint Benedict. One 
day, a virtuous Goth was using a bill-hook to clear away briers, when the head of it flew off the 
handle and fell into deep water. The Saint, being informed, held the handle in the water, 
whereupon the iron head rose up and joined itself again to the handle. 

A neighbouring priest, envious of the holy man’s reputation, sent 


- 379 - 



him a poisoned loaf. But Benedict miraculously knew it was poisoned. He had the habit of giving 
bread to a certain crow, and when the crow came on the day in question, the Saint said to it: "In 
the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, take up that loaf, and leave it in some such place where no man 
may find it." The crow obeyed, and on its return was given its usual dinner. The wicked priest, 
seeing he could not kill Benedict's body, decided to kill his soul, and sent seven naked young 
women into the monastery. The Saint feared lest some of the younger monks might be moved to 
sin, and therefore departed himself, that the priest might no longer have a motive for such acts. 

But the priest was killed by the ceiling of his rooms’ falling on him. A monk pursued Benedict 
with the news, rejoicing, and bidding him return. Benedict mourned over the death of the sinner, 
and imposed a penance on the monk for rejoicing. 

Gregory does not only relate miracles, but deigns, now and then, to tell facts in the career of Saint 
Benedict. After founding twelve monasteries, he finally came to Monte Cassino, where there was 
a "chapel" to Apollo, still used by the country people for heathen worship. "Even to that very time, 
the mad multitude of infidels did offer most wicked sacrifice." Benedict destroyed the altar, 
substituted a church, and converted the neighbouring pagans. Satan was annoyed: 

"The old enemy of mankind, not taking this in good part, did not now privily or in a dream, but in 
open sight present himself to the eyes of that holy father, and with great outcries complained that 
he had offered him violence. The noise which he made, the monks did hear, but himself they 
could not see: but, as the venerable father told them, he appeared visibly unto him most fell and 
cruel, and as though, with his fiery mouth and flaming eyes, he would have tom him in pieces: 
what the devil said unto him, all the monks did hear; for first he would call him by his name, and 
because the man of God vouchsafed him not any answer, then would he fall a reviling and railing 
at him: for when he cried out, calling him 'Blessed Bennet,' and yet found that he gave him no 
answer, straightways he would turn his tune and say: 'Cursed Bennet, and not blessed: what hast 
thou to do with me? and why dost thou thus persecute me?"' Here the story ends; one gathers that 
Satan gave up in despair. 

I have quoted at some length from these dialogues, because they have a threefold importance. 

First, they are the principal source for 


- 380 - 



our knowledge of the life of Saint Benedict, whose Rule became the model for all Western 
monasteries except those of Ireland or founded by Irishmen. Secondly, they give a vivid picture 
of the mental atmosphere among the most civilized people living at the end of the sixth century. 
Thirdly, they are written by Pope Gregory the Great, fourth and last of the Doctors of the 
Western Church, and politically one of the most eminent of the popes. To him we must now 
turn our attention. 

The Venerable W. H. Hutton, Archdeacon of Northampton, ^claims that Gregory was the 
greatest man of the sixth century; the only rival claimants, he says, would be Justinian and Saint 
Benedict. All three, certainly, had a profound effect on future ages: Justinian by his Laws (not 
by his conquests, which were ephemeral); Benedict by his monastic order; and Gregory by the 
increase of papal power which he brought about. In the dialogues that I have been quoting he 
appears childish and credulous, but as a statesman he is astute, masterful, and very well aware 
of what can be achieved in the complex and changing world in which he has to operate. The 
contrast is surprising; but the most effective men of action are often intellectually secondrate. 

Gregory the Great, the first Pope of that name, was born in Rome, about 540, of a rich and 
noble family. It seems his grandfather had been Pope after he became a widower. He himself, as 
a young man, had a palace and immense wealth. He had what was considered a good education, 
though it did not include a knowledge of Greek, which he never acquired, although he lived for 
six years in Constantinople. In 573 he was prefect of the City of Rome. But religion claimed 
him: he resigned his office, gave his wealth to the founding of monasteries and to charity, and 
turned his own palace into a house for monks, himself becoming a Benedictine. He devoted 
himself to meditation, and to austerities which permanently injured his health. But Pope 
Pelagius II had become aware of his political abilities, and sent him as his envoy to 
Constantinople, to which, since Justinian's time, Rome was nominally subject. Gregory lived in 
Constantinople from 579 to 585, representing papal interests at the Emperor's court, and papal 
theology in discussions with Eastern ecclesiastics, who were always 


* Cambridge Medieval History , II, Chap. VIII. 


- 381 - 


more prone to heresy than those of the West. The patriarch of Constantinople, at this time, held 
the erroneous opinion that our resurrection bodies will be impalpable, but Gregory saved the 
Emperor from falling into this departure from the true faith. He was unable, however, to persuade 
the Emperor to undertake a campaign against the Lombards, which was the principal object of his 
mission. 

The five years 585-590Gregory spent as head of his monastery. Then the Pope died, and Gregory 
succeeded him. The times were difficult, but by their very confusion offered great opportunities to 
an able statesman. The Lombards were ravaging Italy; Spain and Africa were in a state of anarchy 
due to the weakness of the Byzantines and the decadence of Visigoths and the depredations of 
Moors. In France there were wars between North and South. Britain, which had been Christian 
under the Romans, had reverted to paganism since the Saxon invasion. There were still remnants 
of Arianism, and the heresy of the Three Chapters was by no means extinct. The turbulent times 
infected even bishops, many of whom led far from exemplary lives. Simony was rife, and 
remained a crying evil until the latter half of the eleventh century. 

All these sources of trouble Gregory combated with energy and sagacity. Before his pontificate, 
the bishop of Rome, though acknowledged to be the greatest man in the hierarchy, was not 
regarded as having any jurisdiction outside his own diocese. Saint Ambrose, for example, who 
was on the best of tenns with the Pope of his day, obviously never regarded himself as in any 
degree subject to his authority. Gregory, owing partly to his personal qualities and partly to the 
prevailing anarchy, was able to assert successfully an authority which was admitted by 
ecclesiastics throughout the West, and even, to a lesser degree, in the East. He exerted this 
authority chiefly by means of letters to bishops and secular rulers in all parts of the Roman world, 
but also in other ways. His Book of Pastoral Rule, containing advice to bishops, had a great 
influence throughout the earlier Middle Ages. It was intended as a guide to the duties of bishops, 
and was accepted as such. He wrote it in the first instance for the bishop of Ravenna, and sent it 
also to the bishop of Seville. Under Charlemagne, it was given to bishops at consecration. Alfred 
the Great translated it into Anglo-Saxon. In the East it was circulated in Greek. It gives sound, if 
not surprising, advice to bishops, such as not to neglect busi- 


- 382 - 



ness. It tells them also that rulers should not be criticized, but should be kept alive to the danger of 
hell-fire if they fail to follow the advice of the Church. 

Gregory's letters are extraordinarily interesting, not only as showing his character, but as giving a 
picture of his age. His tone, except to the emperor and the ladies of the Byzantine court, is that of 
a head master-sometimes commending, often reproving, never showing the faintest hesitation as 
to his right to give orders. 

Let us take as a sample his letters during one year ( 599). The first is a letter to the bishop of 
Cagliari in Sardinia, who, though old, was bad. It says, in part: "It has been told me that on the 
Lord’s day, before celebrating the solemnities of mass, thou wentest forth to plough up the crop of 
the bearer of these presents. . . . Also, after the solemnities of mass thou didst not fear to root up 
the landmarks of that possession. . . . Seeing that we still spare thy grey hairs, bethink thee at 
length, old man, and restrain thyself from such levity of behaviour, and perversity of deeds." He 
writes at the same time to the secular authorities of Sardinia on the same subject. The bishop in 
question next has to be reproved because he makes a charge for conducting funerals; and then 
again because, with his sanction, a converted Jew placed the Cross and an image of the Virgin in a 
synagogue. Moreover, he and other Sardinian bishops have been known to travel without 
pennission of their metropolitan; this must cease. Then follows a very severe letter to the 
proconsul of Dalmatia, saying, among other things: "We see not of what sort your satisfaction is 
either to God or men"; and again: "With regard to your seeking to be in favour with us, it is fitting 
that with your whole heart and soul, and with tears, as becomes you, you should satisfy your 
Redeemer for such things as these." I am ignorant as to what the wretch had done. 

Next comes a letter to Callinicus, exarch of Italy, congratulating him on a victory over the Slavs, 
and telling him how to act towards the heretics of Istria, who erred as to the Three Chapters. He 
writes also on this subject to the bishop of Ravenna. Once, by way of exception, we find a letter to 
the bishop of Syracuse, in which Gregory defends himself instead of finding fault with others. The 
question at issue is a weighty one, namely whether "Alleluia" should be said at a certain point in 
the mass. Gregory's usage, he says, is not adopted from subservience to the Byzantines, as the 
bishop of Syracuse sug- 


- 383 - 



gest, but is derived from Saint James via the blessed Jerome. Those who thought he was being 
unduly subservient to Greek usage were therefore in error. (A similar question was one of the 
causes of the schism of the Old Believers in Russia.) 

There are a number of letters to barbarian sovereigns, male and female. Brunichild, queen of the 
Franks, wanted the pallium conferred on a certain French bishop, and Gregory was willing to 
grant her request; but unfortunately the emissary she sent was a schismatic. To Agilulph, King of 
the Lombards, he writes congratulating him on having made peace. "For, if unhappily peace had 
not been made, what else could have ensued but, with sin and danger on both sides, the shedding 
of the blood of miserable peasants whose labour profits both?" At the same time he writes to 
Agilulph’s wife Queen Theodelinda, telling her to influence her husband to persist in good 
courses. He writes again to Brunichild to find fault with two things in her kingdom: That laymen 
are promoted at once to be bishops, without a probationary time as ordinary priests; and that Jews 
are allowed to have Christian slaves. To Theodoric and Theodobert, kings of the Franks, he writes 
saying that, owing to the exemplary piety of the Franks, he would like to utter only pleasant 
things, but he cannot refrain from pointing out the prevalence of simony in their kingdom. He 
writes again about a wrong done to the bishop of Turin. One letter to a barbarian sovereign is 
wholly complimentary; it is to Richard, king of the Visigoths, who had been an Arian, but became 
a Catholic in 587. For this the Pope rewards him by sending him "a small key from the most 
sacred body of the blessed apostle Peter to convey his blessing, containing iron from his chains, 
that what had bound his neck for martyrdom may loose yours from all sins." I hope His Majesty 
was pleased with this present. 

The bishop of Antioch is instructed as to the heretical synod of Ephesus, and informed that "it has 
come to our ears that in the Churches of the East no one attains to a sacred order except by giving 
of bribes"— a matter which the bishop is to rectify wherever it is in his power to do so. The bishop 
of Marseilles is reproached for breaking certain images which were being adored: it is true that 
adoration of images is wrong, but images nevertheless are useful and should be treated with 
respect. Two bishops of Gaul are reproached because a lady who had become a nun was 
afterwards forced to marry. "If 


- 384 - 



this be so, . . . you shall have the office of hirelings, and not the merit of shepherds." 

The above are a few of the letters of a single year. It is no wonder that he found no time for 
contemplation, as he laments in one of the letters of this year ( CXXI). 

Gregory was no friend to secular learning. To Desiderius, bishop of Vienne in France, he writes: 

"It came to our ears, what we cannot mention without shame, that thy Fraternity is [i.e., thou art] 
in the habit of expounding grammar to certain persons. This thing we took so much amiss, and so 
strongly disapproved it, that we changed what had been said before into groaning and sadness, 
since the praises of Christ cannot find room in one mouth with the praises of Jupiter. ... In 
proportion as it is execrable for such a thing to be related of a priest, it ought to be ascertained by 
strict and veracious evidence whether or not it be so." 

This hostility to pagan learning survived in the Church for at least four centuries, till the time of 
Gerbert (Sylvester II). It was only from the eleventh century onward that the Church became 
friendly to learning. 

Gregory's attitude to the emperor is much more deferential than his attitude to barbarian kings. 
Writing to a correspondent in Constantinople he says: "What pleases the most pious emperor, 
whatever he commands to be done, is in his power. As he detennines, so let him provide. Only let 
him not cause us to be mixed up in the deposition [of an orthodox bishop]. Still, what he does, if it 
is canonical, we will follow. But, if it is not canonical, we will bear it, so far as we can without sin 
of our own." When the Emperor Maurice was dethroned by a mutiny, of which the leader was an 
obscure centurion named Phocas, this upstart acquired the throne, and proceeded to massacre the 
five sons of Maurice in their father's presence, after which he put to death the aged Emperor 
himself. Phocas was of course crowned by the patriarch of Constantinople, who had no alternative 
but death. What is more surprising is that Gregory, from the comparatively safe distance of Rome, 
wrote letters of fulsome adulation to the usurper and his wife. "There is this difference," he writes, 
"between the kings of the nations and the emperors of the republic, that the kings of the nations 
are lords of slaves, but the emperors of the republic lords of freemen. . . . May Almighty God in 
every thought and deed keep 


- 385 - 



the heart of your Piety [i.e., you] in the hand of His grace; and whatsoever things should be 
done justly, whatsoever things with clemency, may the Holy Spirit who dwells in your breast 
direct." And to the wife of Phocas, the Empress Leontia, he writes: "What tongue may suffice to 
speak, what mind to think, what great thanks we owe to Almighty God for the serenity of your 
empire, in that such hard burdens of long duration have been removed from our necks, and the 
gentle yoke of imperial supremacy has returned." One might suppose Maurice to have been a 
monster; in fact, he was a good old man. Apologists excuse Gregory on the plea that he did not 
know what atrocities had been committed by Phocas; but he certainly knew the customary 
behaviour of Byzantine usurpers, and he did not wait to ascertain whether Phocas was an 
exception. 

The conversion of the heathen was an important part of the increasing influence of the Church. 
The Goths had been converted before the end of the fourth century by Ulphilas, or Ulfila— 
unfortunately to Arianism, which was also the creed of the Vandals. After the death of 
Theodoric, however, the Goths became gradually Catholic: the king of the Visigoths, as we 
have seen, adopted the orthodox faith in the time of Gregory. The Franks were Catholic from 
the time of Clovis. The Irish were converted before the fall of the Western Empire by Saint 
Patrick, a Somersetshire country gentleman jywho lived among them from 432 till his death in 
461. The Irish in turn did much to evangelize Scotland and the North of England. In this work 
the greatest missionary was Saint Columba; another was Saint Columban, who wrote long 
letters to Gregory on the date of Easter and other important questions. The conversion of 
England, apart from Northumbria, was Gregory's special care. Every one knows how, before he 
was Pope, he saw two fair-haired blue-eyed boys in the slave market in Rome, and on being 
told they were Angles replied, "No, angels." When he became Pope he sent Saint Augustine to 
Kent to convert them. There are many letters in his correspondence to Saint Augustine, to 
Edilbert, king of the Angeli, and to others, about the mission. Gregory decrees that heathen 
temples in England are not to be destroyed, but the idols are to be destroyed and the temples 
then consecrated as churches. Saint Augustine puts a number of queries to the 


* So at least Bury says in his life of the Saint. 


- 386 - 


Pope, such as whether cousins may marry, whether spouses who have had intercourse the previous 
night may come to church (yes, if they have washed, says Gregory), and so on. The mission, as we 
know, prospered, and that is why we are all Christians at this day. 

The period we have been considering is peculiar in the fact that, though its great men are inferior 
to those of many other epochs, their influence on future ages has been greater. Roman law, 
monasticism, and the papacy owe their long and profound influence very largely to Justinian, 
Benedict, and Gregory. The men of the sixth century, though less civilized than their predecessors, 
were much more civilized than the men of the next four centuries, and they succeeded in framing 
institutions that ultimately tamed the barbarians. It is noteworthy that, of the above three men, two 
were aristocratic natives of Rome, and the third was Roman Emperor. Gregory is in a very real 
sense the last of the Romans. His tone of command, while justified by his office, has its instinctive 
basis in Roman aristocratic pride. After him, for many ages, the city of Rome ceased to produce 
great men. But in its downfall it succeeded in fettering the souls of its conquerors: the reverence 
which they felt for the Chair of Peter was an outcome of the awe which they felt for the throne of 
the Caesars. 

In the East, the course of history was different. Mahomet was bom when Gregory was about thirty 
years old. 


-387- 

Part II. The Schoolmen 

CHAPTER VII The Papacy in the Dark Ages 

DURING the four centuries from Gregory the Great to Sylvester II, the papacy underwent 
astonishing vicissitudes. It subject, at times, to the Greek Emperor, at other times to the Western 
Emperor, and at yet other times to the local Roman aristocracy; nevertheless, vigorous popes in 
the eighth and ninth centuries, seizing propitious moments, built up the tradition of papal power. 
The period from A.D. 600 to 1000 is of vital importance for the understanding of the medieval 
Church and its relation to the State. 

The popes achieved independence of the Greek emperors, not so much by their own efforts, as by 
the arms of the Lombards, to whom, however, they felt no gratitude whatever. The Greek Church 
remained always, in a great measure, subservient to the Emperor, who considered himself 
competent to decide on matters of faith, as well as to appoint and depose bishops, even patriarchs. 
The monks strove for independence of the Emperor, and for that reason sided, at times, with the 
Pope. But the patriarchs of Constantinople, though willing to submit to the Emperor, refused to 
regard themselves as in any degree subject to papal authority. At times, when the Emperor needed 
the Pope's help against barbarians in Italy, he was more friendly to the Pope than the patriarch of 
Constantinople was. The main cause of the ultimate separation of the Eastern and the Western 
Churches was the refusal of the former to submit to papal jurisdiction. 

After the defeat of the Byzantines by the Lombards, the popes had 


- 388 - 



reason to fear that they also would be conquered by these vigorous barbarians. They saved 
themselves by an alliance with the Franks, who, under Charlemagne, conquered Italy and 
Germany. This alliance produced the Holy Roman Empire, which had a constitution that assumed 
hannony between Pope and Emperor. The power of the Carolingian dynasty, however, decayed 
rapidly. At first, the Pope reaped the advantage of this decay, and in the latter half of the ninth 
century Nicholas I raised the papal power to hitherto unexampled heights. The general anarchy, 
however, led to the practical independence of the Roman aristocracy, which, in the tenth century, 
controlled the papacy, with disastrous results. The way in which, by a great movement of refonn, 
the papacy, and the Church generally, was saved from subordination to the feudal aristocracy, will 
be the subject of a later chapter. 

In the seventh century, Rome was still subject to the military power of the emperors, and popes 
had to obey or suffer. Some, e.g., Honorius, obeyed, even to the point of heresy; others, e.g., 
Martin I, resisted, and were imprisoned by the Emperor. From 685 to 752, most of the popes were 
Syrians or Greeks. Gradually, however, as the Lombards acquired more and more of Italy, 
Byzantine power declined. The Emperor Leo the Isaurian, in 726, issued his iconoclast decree, 
which was regarded as heretical, not only throughout the West, but by a large party in the East. 
This the popes resisted vigorously and successfully; at last, in 787, under the Empress Irene (at 
first as regent), the East abandoned the iconoclast heresy. Meanwhile, however, events in the West 
had put an end forever to the control of Byzantium over the papacy. 

In about the year 751, the Lombards captured Ravenna, the capital of Byzantine Italy. This event, 
while it exposed the popes to great danger from the Lombards, freed them from all dependence on 
the Greek emperors. The popes had preferred the Greeks to the Lombards for several reasons. 

First, the authority of the emperors was legitimate, whereas barbarian kings, unless recognized by 
the emperors, were regarded as usurpers. Second, the Greeks were civilized. Third, the Lombards 
were nationalists, whereas the Church retained Roman internationalism. Fourth, the Lombards had 
been Arians, and some odium still clung to them after their conversion. 

The Lombards, under King Liutprand, attempted to conquer Rome 


- 389 - 



in 739, and were hotly opposed by Pope Gregory III, who turned to the Franks for aid. The 
Merovingian kings, the descendants of Clovis, had lost all real power in the Frankish kingdom, 
which was governed by the "Mayors of the Palace." At this time the Mayor of the Palace was an 
exceptionally vigorous and able man, Charles Martel, like William the Conqueror a bastard. In 
732 he had won the decisive battle of Tours against the Moors, thereby saving France for 
Christendom. This should have won him the gratitude of the Church, but financial necessity led 
him to seize some Church lands, which much diminished ecclesiastical appreciation of his merits. 
However, he and Gregory III both died in 741, and his successor Pepin was wholly satisfactory to 
the Church. Pope Stephen III, in 754, to escape the Lombards, crossed the Alps and visited Pepin, 
when a bargain was struck which proved highly advantageous to both parties. The Pope needed 
military protection, but Pepin needed something that only the Pope could bestow: the 
legitimization of his title as king in place of the last of the Merovingians. In return for this, Pepin 
bestowed on the Pope Ravenna and all the territory of the former Exarchate in Italy. Since it could 
not be expected that Constantinople would recognize such a gift, this involved a political 
severance from the Eastern Empire. 

If the popes had remained subject to the Greek emperors, the development of the Catholic Church 
would have been very different. In the Eastern Church, the patriarch of Constantinople never 
acquired either that independence of secular authority or that superiority to other ecclesiastics that 
was achieved by the Pope. Originally all bishops were considered equal, and to a considerable 
extent this view persisted in the East. Moreover, there were other Eastern patriarchs, at 
Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem, whereas the Pope was the only patriarch in the West. (This 
fact, however, lost its importance after the Mohammedan conquest.) In the West, but not in the 
East, the laity were mostly illiterate for many centuries, and this gave the Church an advantage in 
the West which it did not possess in the East. The prestige of Rome surpassed that of any Eastern 
city, for it combined the imperial tradition with legends of the martyrdom of Peter and Paul, and 
of Peter as first Pope. The Emperor's prestige might have sufficed to cope with that of the Pope, 
but no Western monarch's could. The Holy Roman emperors were often destitute of real 


- 390 - 



power; moreover they only became emperors when the Pope crowned them. For all these reasons, 
the emancipation of the Pope from Byzantine domination was essential both to the independence 
of the Church in relation to secular monarchs, and to the ultimate establishment of the papal 
monarchy in the government of the Western Church. 

Certain documents of great importance, the "Donation of Constantine" and the False Decretals, 
belong to this period. The False Decretals need not concern us, but something must be said of the 
Donation of Constantine. In order to give an air of antique legality to Pepin’s gift, churchmen 
forged a document, purporting to be a decree issued by the Emperor Constantine, by which, when 
he founded the New Rome, he bestowed upon the Pope the old Rome and all its Western 
territories. This bequest, which was the basis of the Pope's temporal power, was accepted as 
genuine by the whole of the subsequent Middle Ages. It was first rejected as a forgery, in the time 
of the Renaissance, by Lorenzo Valla ( ca . 1406-57) in 1439. He had written a book "on the 
elegancies of the Latin language," which, naturally, were absent in a production of the eighth 
century. Oddly enough, after he had published his book against the Donation of Constantine, as 
well as a treatise in praise of Epicurus, he was made apostolic secretary by Pope Nicholas V, who 
cared more for latinity than for the Church. Nicholas V did not, however, propose to give up the 
States of the Church, though the Pope's title to them had been based upon the supposed Donation. 

The contents of this remarkable document are summarized by C. Delisle Burns as follows: 

After a summary of the Nicene creed, the fall of Adam, and the birth of Christ, Constantine says 
he was suffering from leprosy, that doctors were useless, and that he therefore approached "the 
priests of the Capitol." They proposed that he should slaughter several infants and be washed in 
their blood, but owing to their mothers' tears he restored them. That night Peter and Paul appeared 
to him and said that Pope Sylvester was hiding in a cave on Soracte, and would cure him. He went 
to Soracte, where the "universal Pope" told him Peter and Paul were apostles, not gods, showed 
him portraits which he recognized from his vision, and admitted it before all his "satraps." 
PopeSilvester thereupon assigned him a period of penance in a hair shirt; then he baptized him, 
when he saw a hand from heaven touch- 


- 391 - 



ing him. He was cured of leprosy and gave up worshipping idols. Then "with all his satraps, the 
Senate, his nobles and the whole Roman people, he thought it good to grant supreme power to the 
See of Peter," and superiority over Antioch, Alexandria, Jerusalem, and Constantinople. He then 
built a church in his palace of the Lateran. On the Pope he conferred his crown, tiara, and imperial 
gannents. He placed a tiara on the Pope's head and held the reins of his horse. He left to "Silvester 
and his successors Rome and all the provinces, districts, and cities of Italy and the West to be 
subject to the Roman Church forever"; he then moved East "because, where the princedom of 
bishops and the head of the Christian religion has been established by the heavenly Emperor it is 
not just that an earthly Emperor should have power." 

The Lombards did not tamely submit to Pepin and the Pope, but in repeated wars with the Franks 
they were worsted. At last, in 774, Pepin's son Charlemagne marched into Italy, completely 
defeated the Lombards, had himself recognized as their king, and then occupied Rome, where he 
confirmed Pepin's donation. The Popes of his day, Hadrian and Leo III, found it to their advantage 
to further his schemes in every way. He conquered most of Gennany, converted the Saxons by 
vigorous persecution, and finally, in his own person, revived the Western Empire, being crowned 
Emperor by the Pope in Rome on Christmas Day, A.D. 800. 

The foundation of the Holy Roman Empire marks an epoch in medieval theory, though much less 
in medieval practice. The Middle Ages were peculiarly addicted to legal fictions, and until this 
time the fiction had persisted that the Western provinces of the fonner Roman Empire were still 
subject, de jure, to the Emperor in Constantinople, who was regarded as the sole source of legal 
authority. Charlemagne, an adept in legal fictions, maintained that the throne of the Empire was 
vacant, because the reigning Eastern sovereign Irene (who called herself emperor, not empress) 
was a usurper, since no woman could be emperor. Charles derived his claim to legitimacy from 
the Pope. There was thus, from the first, a curious interdependence of pope and emperor. No one 
could be emperor unless crowned by the Pope in Rome; on the other hand, for some centuries, 
every strong emperor claimed the right to appoint or depose popes. The medieval theory of 
legitimate power depended upon both emperor 


- 392 - 



and pope; their mutual dependence was galling to both, but for centuries inescapable. There was 
constant friction, with advantage now to one side, now to the other. At last, in the thirteenth 
century, the conflict became irreconcilable. The Pope was victorious, but lost moral authority 
shortly afterwards. The Pope and the Holy Roman Emperor both survived, the Pope to the 
present day, the Emperor to the time of Napoleon. But the elaborate medieval theory that had 
been built up concerning their respective powers ceased to be effective during the fifteenth 
century. The unity of Christendom, which it maintained, was destroyed by the power of the 
French, Spanish, and English monarchies in the secular sphere, and by the Refonnation in the 
sphere of religion. 

The character of Charles the Great and his entourage is thus summed up by Dr. Gerhard 
Seeliger: 

Vigorous life was developed at Charles's court. We see there magnificence and genius, but 
morality also. For Charles was not particular about the people he drew round him. He himself 
was no model, and he suffered the greatest licence in those whom he liked and found useful. As 
"Holy Emperor" he was addressed, though his life exhibited little holiness. He is so addressed 
by Alcuin, who also praises the Emperor's beautiful daughter Rotrud as distinguished for her 
virtues in spite of her having borne a son to Count Roderic of Maine, though not his wife. 
Charles would not be separated from his daughters, he would not allow their marriage, and he 
was therefore obliged to accept the consequences. The other daughter, Bertha, also had two 
sons by the pious Abbot Angilbert of St. Riquier. In fact the court of Charles was a centre of 
very loose life. 

Charlemagne was a vigorous barbarian, politically in alliance with the Church, but not unduly 
burdened with personal piety. He could not read or write, but he inaugurated a literary 
renaissance. He was dissolute in his life, and unduly fond of his daughters, but he did all in his 
power to promote holy living among his subjects. He, like his father Pepin, made skilful use of 
the zeal of missionaries to promote his influence in Germany, but he saw to it that popes obeyed 
his orders. They did this the more willingly, because Rome had become a barbarous city, in 
which the person of the Pope was not safe without 


* In Cambridge Medieval Histoiy, II, 663. 


- 393 - 


external protection, and papal elections had degenerated into disorderly faction fights, In 799, 
local enemies seized the Pope, imprisoned him, and threatened to blind him. During Charles's 
lifetime, it seemed as if a new order would be inaugurated; but after his death little survived 
except a theory. 

The gains of the Church, and more particularly of the papacy, were more solid than those of the 
Western Empire. England had been converted by a monastic mission under the orders of Gregory 
the Great, and remained much more subjectto Rome than were the countries with bishops 
accustomed to local autonomy. The conversion of Gennany was largely the work of Saint 
Boniface ( 680-754), an English missionary, who was a friend of Charles Martel and Pepin, and 
completely faithful to the Pope. Boniface founded many monasteries in Gennany; his friend Saint 
Gall founded the Swiss monastery which bears his name. According to some authorities, Boniface 
anointed Pepin as king with a ritual taken from the First Book of Kings. 

Saint Boniface was a native of Devonshire, educated at Exeter and Winchester. He went to Frisia 
in 716, but soon had to return. In 717 he went to Rome, and in 719 Pope Gregory II sent him to 
Germany to convert the Germans and to combat the influence of the Irish missionaries (who, it 
will be remembered, erred as to the date of Easter and the shape of the tonsure). After 
considerable successes, he returned to Rome in 722, where he was made bishop by Gregory II, to 
whom he took an oath of obedience. The Pope gave him a letter to Charles Marcel, and charged 
him to suppress heresy in addition to converting the heathen. In 732 he became archbishop; in 738 
he visited Rome a third time. In 741 Pope Zacharias made him legate, and charged him to reform 
the Frankish Church. He founded the abbey of Fulda, to which he gave a rule stricter than the 
Benedictine. Then he had a controversy with an Irish bishop of Salzburg, named Virgil, who 
maintained that there are other worlds than ours, but was nevertheless canonized. In 754, after 
returning to Frisia, Boniface and his companions were massacred by the heathen. It was owing to 
him that Gennan Christianity was papal, not Irish. 

English monasteries, particularly those of Yorkshire, were of great importance at this time. Such 
civilization as had existed in Roman Britain had disappeared, and the new civilization introduced 
by Christian missionaries centred almost entirely round the Benedictine 


- 394 - 



abbeys, which owed everything directly to Rome. The Venerable Bede was a monk at Jarrow. His 
pupil Ecgbert, first archbishop of York, founded a cathedral school, where Alcuin was educated. 

Alcuin is an important figure in the culture of the time. He went to Rome in 780, and in the course 
of his journey met Charlemagne at Parma. The Emperor employed him to teach Latin to the 
Franks and to educate the royal family. He spent a considerable part of his life at the court of 
Charlemagne, engaged in teaching and in founding schools. At the end of his life he was abbot of 
St. Martin's at Tours. He wrote a number of books, including a verse history of the church at York. 
The emperor, though uneducated, had a considerable belief in the value of culture, and for a brief 
period diminished the darkness of the dark ages. But his work in this direction was ephemeral. 

The culture of Yorkshire was for a time destroyed by the Danes, that of France was damaged by 
the Normans. The Saracens raided Southern Italy, conquered Sicily, and in 846 even attacked 
Rome. On the whole, the tenth century was, in Western Christendom, about the darkest epoch; for 
the ninth is redeemed by the English ecclesiastics and by the astonishing figure of Johannes 
Scotus, as to whom I shall have more to say presently. 

The decay of Carolingian power after the death of Charlemagne and the division of his empire 
redounded, at first, to the advantage of the papacy. Pope Nicholas I ( 858-867) raised papal power 
to a far greater height than it had ever attained before. He quarrelled with the Emperors of the East 
and the West, with King Charles the Bald of France and King Lothar II of Lorraine, and with the 
episcopate of nearly every Christian country; but in almost all his quarrels he was successftd. The 
clergy in many regions had become dependent on the local princes, and he set to work to remedy 
this state of affairs. His two greatest controversies concerned the divorce of Lothar II and the 
uncanonical deposition of Ignatius, patriarch of Constantinople. The power of the Church, 
throughout the Middle Ages, had a great deal to do with royal divorces. Kings were men of 
headstrong passions, who felt that the indissolubility of marriage was a doctrine for subjects only. 
The Church, however, could alone solemnize a marriage, and if the Church declared a marriage 
invalid, a disputed succession and a dynastic war were very likely to result. The Church, therefore, 
was in a very strong position in opposing royal divorces 


- 395 - 



and irregular marriages. In England, it lost this position under Henry VIII, but recovered it under 
Edward VIII. 


When Lothar II demanded a divorce, the clergy of his kingdom agreed. Pope Nicholas, however, 
deposed the bishops who had acquiesced, and totally refused to admit the king's plea for divorce. 
Lothar's brother, the Emperor Louis II, thereupon marched on Rome with the intention of 
overawing the Pope; but superstitious terrors prevailed, and he retired. In the end, the Pope's will 
was victorious. 

The business of the Patriarch Ignatius was interesting, as showing that the Pope could still assert 
himself in the East. Ignatius, who was obnoxious to the Regent Bardas, was deposed, and Photius, 
hitherto a layman, was elevated to his place. The Byzantine government asked the Pope to 
sanction this proceeding. He sent two legates to inquire into the matter; when they arrived in 
Constantinople, they were terrorized, and gave their assent. For some time, the facts were 
concealed from the Pope, but when he came to know them, he took a high line. He summoned a 
council in Rome to consider the question; he deposed one of the legates from his bishopric, and 
also the archbishop of Syracuse, who had consecrated Photius; he anathematized Photius, deposed 
all whom he had ordained, and restored all who had been deposed for opposing him. The Emperor 
Michael III was furious, and wrote the Pope an angry letter, but the Pope replied: "The day of 
king-priests and emperor-pontiffs is past, Christianity has separated the two functions, and 
Christian emperors have need of the Pope in view of the life eternal, whereas popes have no need 
of emperors except as regards temporal things." Phofius and the Emperor retorted by summoning 
a council, which excommunicated the Pope and declared the Roman Church heretical. Soon after 
this, however, Michael III was murdered, and his successor Basil restored Ignatius, explicitly 
recognizing papal jurisdiction in the matter. This triumph happened just after the death of 
Nicholas, and was attributable almost entirely to the accidents of palace revolutions. After the 
death of Ignatius, Photius again became patriarch, and the split between the Eastern and the 
Western Churches was widened. Thus it cannot be said that Nicholas's policy in this matter was 
victorious in the long run. 

Nicholas had almost more difficulty in imposing his will upon the episcopate than upon kings. 
Archbishops had come to consider themselves very great men, and they were reluctant to submit 
tamely to an 


- 396 - 



eclesiastical monarch. He maintained, however, that bishops owe their existence to the Pope, and 
while he lived he succeeded, on the whole, in making this view prevail. There was, throughout 
these centuries, great doubt as to how bishops should be appointed. Originally they were elected 
by the acclamation of the faithful in their cathedral city; then, frequently, by a synod of 
neighbouring bishops; then, sometimes, by the king, and sometimes by the Pope. Bishops could be 
deposed for grave causes, but it was not clear whether they should be tried by the Pope or by a 
provincial synod. All these uncertainties made the powers of an office dependent upon the energy 
and astuteness of its holders. Nicholas stretched papal power to the utmost limits of which it was 
then capable; under his successors, it sank again to a very low ebb. 

During the tenth century, the papacy was completely under the control of the local Roman 
aristocracy. There was, as yet, no fixed rule as to the election of popes; sometimes they owed their 
elevation to popular acclaim, sometimes to emperors or kings, and sometimes, as in the tenth 
century, to the holders of local urban power in Rome. Rome was, at this time, not a civilized city, 
as it had still been in the time of Gregory the Great. At times there were faction fights; at other 
times some rich family acquired control by a combination of violence and corruption. The 
disorder and weakness of Western Europe was so great at this period that Christendom might have 
seemed in danger of complete destruction. The emperor and the king of France were powerless to 
curb the anarchy produced in their realms by feudal potentates who were nominally their vassals. 
The Hungarians made raids on Northern Italy. The Nonnans raided the French coast, until, in 91 1, 
they were given Nonnandy and in return became Christians. But the greatest danger in Italy and 
Southern France came from the Saracens, who could not be converted, and had no reverence for 
the Church. They completed the conquest of Sicily about the end of the ninth century; they were 
established on the River Garigliano, near Naples; they destroyed Monte Cassino and other great 
monasteries; they had a settlement on the coast of Provence, whence they raided Italy and the 
Alpine valleys, interrupting traffic between Rome and the North. 

The conquest of Italy by the Saracens was prevented by the Eastern Empire, which overcame the 
Saracens of the Garigliano in 915. 


- 397 - 



But it was not strong enough to govern Rome, as it had done after Justinian's conquest, and the 
papacy became, for about a hundred years, a perquisite of the Roman aristocracy or of the 
counts of Tusculum. The most powerful Romans, at the beginning of the tenth century, were the 
"Senator" Theophylact and his daughter Marozia, in whose family the papacy nearly became 
hereditary. Marozia had several husbands in succession, and an u nkn own number of lovers. 

One of the latter she elevated to the papacy, under the title of Sergius II ( 904-911). His and her 
son was Pope John XI ( 931-936); her grandson was John XII ( 955-964), who became Pope at 
the age of sixteen and "completed the debasement of the papacy by his debauched life and the 
orgies of which the Lateran palace soon became the scene." ^Marozia is presumably the basis 
for the legend of a female "Pope Joan." 

The popes of this period naturally lost whatever influence their predecessors had retained in the 
East. They lost also the power, which Nicholas I had successfully exercised, over bishops north 
of the Alps. Provincial councils asserted their complete independence of the Pope, but they 
failed to maintain independence of sovereigns and feudal lords. Bishops, more and more, 
became assimilated to lay feudal magnates. "The Church itself thus appears as the victim of the 
same anarchy in which lay society is weltering; all evil appetites range unchecked, and, more 
than ever, such of the clergy as still retain some concern for religion and for the salvation of the 
souls committed to their charge mourn over the universal decadence and direct the eyes of the 
faithful towards the spectre of the end of the world and of the Last Judgment." 

It is a mistake, however, to suppose that a special dread of the end of the world in the year 1000 
prevailed at this time, as used to be thought. Christians, from Saint Paul onward, believed the 
end of the world to be at hand, but they went on with their ordinary business none the less. 

The year 1000 may be conveniently taken as marking the end of the lowest depth to which the 
civilization of Western Europe sank. From this point the upward movement began which 
continued till 1914. In the beginning, progress was mainly due to monastic reform. Outside the 
monastic orders, the clergy had become, for the most 


* Cambridge Medieval History , III, 455. 
a 

„ Ibid. 


- 398 - 


part, violent, immoral, and worldly; they were corrupted by the wealth and power that they owed 
to the benefactions of the pious. The same thing happened, over and over again, even to the 
monastic orders; but reformers, with new zeal, revived their moral force as often as it had 
decayed. 

Another reason which makes the year 1000 a turning-point is the cessation, at about this time, of 
conquest by both Mohammedans and northern barbarians, so far at least as Western Europe is 
concerned. Goths, Lombards, Hungarians, and Normans came in successive waves; each horde in 
turn was Christianized, but each in turn weakened the civilized tradition. The Western Empire 
broke up into many barbarian kingdoms; the kings lost authority over their vassals; there was 
universal anarchy, with perpetual violence both on a large and on a small scale. At last all the 
races of vigorous northern conquerors had been converted to Christianity, and had acquired settled 
habitations. The Normans, who were the last comers, proved peculiarly capable of civilization. 
They reconquered Sicily from the Saracens, and made Italy safe from the Mohammedans. They 
brought England back into the Roman world, from which the Danes had largely excluded it. Once 
settled in Normandy, they allowed France to revive, and helped materially in the process. 

Our use of the phrase the "Dark Ages" to cover the period from 600 to 1000 marks our undue 
concentration on Western Europe. In China, this period includes the time of the Tang dynasty, the 
greatest age of Chinese poetry, and in many other ways a most remarkable epoch. From India to 
Spain, the brilliant civilization of Islam flourished. What was lost to Christendom at this time was 
not lost to civilization, but quite the contrary. No one could have guessed that Western Europe 
would later become dominant, both in power and in culture. To us, it seems that West-European 
civilization is civilization, but this is a narrow view. Most of the cultural content of our 
civilization comes to us from the Eastern Mediterranean, from Greeks and Jews. As for power: 
Western Europe was dominant from the Punic Wars to the fall of Rome-say, roughly, during the 
six centuries from 200 B.C. to A.D. 400. After that time, no State in Western Europe could 
compare in power with China, Japan, or the Caliphate. 

Our superiority since the Renaissance is due partly to science and scientific technique, partly to 
political institutions slowly built up 


- 399 - 



during the Middle Ages. There is no reason, in the nature of things why this superiority should 
continue. In the present war, great military strength has been shown by Russia, China, and 
Japan. All these combine Western technique with Eastern ideology-Byzantine, Confucian, or 
Shinto. India, if liberated, will contribute another Oriental element. It seems not unlikely that, 
during the next few centuries, civilization, if it survives, will have greater diversity than it has 
had since the Renaissance. There is an imperialism of culture which is harder to overcome than 
the imperialism of power. Long after the Western Empire fell— indeed until the Reformation— all 
European culture retained a tincture of Roman imperialism. It now has, for us, a West-European 
imperialistic flavour. I think that, if we are to feel at home in the world after the present war, we 
shall have to admit Asia to equality in our thoughts, not only politically, but culturally. What 
changes this will bring about, I do not know, but I am convinced that they will be profound and 
of the greatest importance. 


CHAPTER VIII John the Scot 

JOHN THE SCOT, or Johannes Scotus, to which is sometimes added Eriugena or Erigena, Ms 
the most astonishing person of the ninth century; he would have been less surprising if he had 
lived in the fifth or the fifteenth century. He was an Irishman, a Neoplatonist, an accomplished 
Greek scholar, a Pelagian, a pantheist. He spent much of his life under the patronage of Charles 
the Bald, king of France, and though he was certainly far from orthodox, yet, so far as we know, 
he escaped persecution. He set reason above faith, and cared nothing for the authority of 
ecclesiastics; yet his arbitrament was invoked to settle their controversies. 


* This addition is redundant; it would make his name " Irish John from Ireland." In the ninth 
century "Scotus" means "Irishman." 


- 400 - 


To understand the occurrence of such a man, we must turn our attention first to Irish culture in 
the centuries following Saint Patrick. Apart from the extremely painful fact that Saint Patrick 
was an Englishman, there are two other scarcely less painful circumstances: first, that there 
were Christians in Ireland before he went there; second, that, whatever he may have done for 
Irish Christianity, it was not to him that Irish culture was due. At the time of the invasion of 
Gaul (says a Gaulish author), first by Attila, then by the Goths, Vandals, and Alaric, "all the 
learned men on their side the sea fled, and in the countries beyond sea, namely Ireland, and 
wherever else they betook themselves, brought to the inhabitants of those regions an enonnous 
advance in learning." Mf any of these men sought refuge in England, the Angles and Saxons 
and Jutes must have mopped them up; but those who went to Ireland succeeded, in combination 
with the missionaries, in transplanting a great deal of the knowledge and civilization that was 
disappearing from the Continent. There is good reason to believe that, throughout the sixth, 
seventh, and eighth centuries, a knowledge of Greek, as well as a considerable familiarity with 

Latin classics, survived among the Irish. —Greek was known in England from the time of 
Theodore, archbishop of Canterbury ( 669-690), who was himself a Greek, educated at Athens; 
it may also have become known, in the North, through Irish missionaries. "During the latter part 
of the seventh century," says Montague James, "it was in Ireland that the thirst for knowledge 
was keenest, and the work of teaching was most actively carried on. There the Latin language 
(and in a less degree the Greek) was studied from a scholar's point of view. ... It was when, 
impelled in the first instance by missionary zeal, and later by troubled conditions at home, they 
passed over in large numbers to the Continent, that they became instrumental in rescuing 
fragments of the literature which they had already leamt to value." a€j Heiric of Auxerre, about 
876, describes this influx of Irish scholars: "Ireland, despising the dangers of the sea, is 
migrating almost en masse with her crowd of philosophers to our shores, and all the most 
learned doom them- 


* Cambridge Medieval History , III, 501. 

^ This question is discussed carefully in the Cambridge Medieval History, III, Ch. XIX, and 
€ the conclusion is in favour of Irish knowledge of Greek. 

a 

€ Loc. cit., pp. 507-08. 
i 


- 401 - 


selves to voluntary exile to attend the bidding of Solomon the wise" — i. e., King Charles the 
Bald. 

The lives of learned men have at many times been perforce nomadic. At the beginning of Greek 
philosophy, many of the philosophers were refugees from the Persians; at the end of it, in the 
time of Justinian, they became refugees to the Persians. In the fifth century, as we have just 
seen, men of learning fled from Gaul to the Western Isles to escape the Germans; in the ninth 
century, they fled back from England and Ireland to escape the Scandinavians. In our own day, 
Gennan philosophers have to fly even further West to escape their compatriots. I wonder 
whether it will be equally long before a return flight takes place. 

Too little is known of the Irish in the days when they were preserving for Europe the tradition 
of classical culture. This learning was connected with monasteries, and was full of piety, as 
their penitentials show; but it does not seem to have been much concerned with theological 
niceties. Being monastic rather than episcopal, it had not the administrative outlook that 
characterized Continental ecclesiastics from Gregory the Great onwards. And being in the main 
cut off from effective contact with Rome, it still regarded the Pope as he was regarded in the 
time of Saint Ambrose, not as he came to be regarded later. Pelagius, though probably a Briton, 
is thought by some to have been an Irishman. It is likely that his heresy survived in Ireland, 
where authority could not stamp it out, as it did, with difficulty, in Gaul. These circumstances 
do something to account for the extraordinary freedom and freshness of John the Scot's 
speculations. 

The beginning and the end of John the Scot's life are unknown; we know only the middle 
period, during which he was employed by the king of France. He is supposed to have been bom 
about 800, and to have died about 877, but both dates are guesswork. He was in France during 
the papacy of Pope Nicholas I, and we meet again, in his life, the characters who appear in 
connection with that Pope, such as Charles the Bald and the Emperor Michael and the Pope 
himself. 

John was invited to France by Charles the Bald about the year 


* Ibid., p. 524. 


- 402 - 


843, and was by him placed at the head of the court school. A dispute as to predestination and free 
will had arisen between Gottschalk, a monk, and the important ecclesiastic Hincmar, archbishop 
of Rheims. The monk was predestinarian, the archbishop libertarian. John supported the 
archbishop in a treatise On Divine Predestination, but his support went too far for prudence. The 
subject was a thorny one; Augustine had dealt with it in his writings against Pelagius, but it was 
dangerous to agree with Augustine and still more dangerous to disagree with him explicitly. John 
supported free will, and this might have passed uncensured; but what roused indignation was the 
purely philosophic character of his argument. Not that he professed to controvert anything 
accepted in theology, but that he maintained the equal, or even superior, authority of a philosophy 
independent of revelation. He contended that reason and revelation are both sources of truth, and 
therefore cannot conflict; but if they ever seem to conflict, reason is to be preferred. True religion, 
he said, is true philosophy; but, conversely, true philosophy is true religion. His work was 
condemned by two councils, in 855 and 859; the first of these described it as "Scots porridge." 

He escaped punishment, however, owing to the support of the king, with whom he seems to have 
been on familiar terms. If William of Malmesbury is to be believed, the king, when John was 
dining with him, asked: "What separates a Scot from a sot?" and John replied, "Only the dinner 
table." The king died in 877, and after this date nothing is known as to John. Some think that he 
also died in that year. There are legends that he was invited to England by Alfred the Great, that 
he became abbot of Malmesbury or Athelney, and was murdered by the monks. This misfortune, 
however, seems to have befallen some other John. 

John’s next work was a translation from the Greek of the pseudoDionysius. This was a work 
which had great fame in the early Middle Ages. When Saint Paul preached in Athens, "certain 
men clave unto him, and believed: among the which was Dionysius the Areopagite" ( Acts XVII, 
34). Nothing more is now known about this man, but in the Middle Ages a great deal more was 
known. He had travelled to France, and founded the abbey of Saint Denis; so at least it was said 
by Hilduin, who was abbot just before John’s arrival in France. Moreover he was the reputed 
author of an important work reconcil- 


- 403 - 



ing Neoplatonism with Christianity. The date of this work is unknown; it was certainly before 500 
and after Plotinus. It was widely known and admired in the East, but in the West it was not 
generally known until the Greek Emperor Michael, in 827, sent a copy to Louis the Pious, who 
gave it to the above-mentioned Abbot Hilduin. He, believing it to have been written by Saint 
Paul's disciple, the reputed founder of his abbey, would have liked to know what its contents 
were; but nobody could translate the Greek until John appeared. He accomplished the translation, 
which he must have done with pleasure, as his own opinions were in close accord with those of 
the pseudo-Dionysius, who, from that time onward, had a great influence on Catholic philosophy 
in the West. 

John’s translation was sent to Pope Nicholas in 860. The Pope was offended because his 
pennission had not been sought before the work was published, and he ordered Charles to send 
John to Rome— an order which was ignored. But as to the substance, and more especially the 
scholarship shown in the translation, he had no fault to find. His librarian Anastasius, an excellent 
Grecian, to whom he submitted it for an opinion, was astonished that a man from a remote and 
barbarous country could have possessed such a profound knowledge of Greek. 

John’s greatest work was called (in Greek) On the Division of Nature. This book was what, in 
scholastic times, would have been termed "realist"; that is to say, it maintained, with Plato, that 
universals are anterior to particulars. He includes in "Nature" not only what is, but also what is 
not. The whole of Nature is divided into four classes: (1) what creates and is not created, (2) what 
creates and is created, (3) what is created but does not create, (4) what neither creates nor is 
created. The first, obviously, is God. The second is the (Platonic) ideas, which subsist in God. The 
third is things in space and time. The fourth, surprisingly, is again God, not as Creator, but as the 
End and Purpose of all things. Everything that emanates from God strives to return to Him; thus 
the end of all such things is the same as their beginning. The bridge between the One and the 
many is the Logos. 

In the realm of not-being he includes various things, for example, physical objects, which do not 
belong to the intelligible world, and sin, since it means loss of the divine pattern. That which 
creates and 


- 404 - 



is not created alone has essential subsistence; it is the essence of all things. God is the 
beginning, middle, and end of things. God's essence is unknowable to men, and even to angels. 
Even to Himself He is, in a sense, unknowable: "God does not kn ow Himself, what He is, 
because He is not a what ; in a certain respect He is incomprehensible to Himself and to every 
intellect." ^_In the being of things God's being can be seen; in their order, His wisdom; in their 
movement, His life. His being is the Father, His wisdom the Son, His life the Holy Ghost. But 
Dionysius is right in saying that no name can be truly asserted of God. There is an affirmative 
theology, in which He is said to be truth, goodness, essence, etc., but such affirmations are only 
symbolically true, for all such predicates have an opposite, but God has no opposite. 

The class of things that both create and are created embraces the whole of the prime causes, or 
prototypes, or Platonic ideas. The total of these prime causes is the Logos. The world of ideas is 
eternal, and yet created. Under the influence of the Holy Ghost, these prime causes give rise to 
the world of particular things, the materiality of which is illusory. When it is said that God 
created things out of "nothing," this "nothing" is to be understood as God Himself, in the sense 
in which He transcends all knowledge. 

Creation is an eternal process: the substance of all finite things is God. The creature is not a 
being distinct from God. The creature subsists in God, and God manifests Himself in the 

creature in an ineffable manner. "The Holy Trinity loves Itself in us and in Itself; — It sees and 
moves Itself." 

Sin has its source in freedom: it arose because man turned towards himself instead of towards 
God. Evil does not have its ground in God, for in God there is no idea of evil. Evil is not-being 
and has no ground, for if it had a ground it would be necessary. Evil is a privation of good. 

The Logos is the principle that brings the many back to the One, and man back to God; it is thus 
the Saviour of the world. By union with God, the part of man that effects union becomes divine. 

John disagrees with the Aristotelians in refusing substantiality to particular things. He calls 
Plato the summit of philosophers. But the 


* Cf. Bradley on the inadequacy of all cognition. He holds that no truth is quite true, but the 
best available truth is not intellectually corrigeable. 

a 

G Cf. Spinoza. 


- 405 - 


first three of his kinds of being are derived indirectly from Aristotle's moving-not-moved, 
moving-and-moved, moved-but-not-moving. The fourth kind of being in John's system, that 
which neither creates nor is created, is derived from the doctrine of Dionysius, that all things 
return into God. 

The unorthodoxy of John the Scot is evident from the above summary. His pantheism, which 
refuses substantial reality to creatures, is contrary to Christian doctrine. His interpretation of the 
creation out of "nothing" is not such as any prudent theologian could accept. His Trinity, which 
closely resembles that of Plotinus, fails to preserve the equality of the Three Persons, although 
he tries to safeguard himself on this point. His independence of mind is shown by these 
heresies, and is astonishing in the ninth century. His Neoplatonic outlook may perhaps have 
been common in Ireland, as it was among the Greek Fathers of the fourth and fifth centuries. It 
may be that, if we knew more about Irish Christianity from the fifth to the ninth century, we 
should find him less surprising. On the other hand, it may be that most of what is heretical in 
him is to be attributed to the influence of the pseudo-Dionysius, who, because of his supposed 
connection with Saint Paul, was mistakenly believed to be orthodox. 

His view of creation as timeless is, of course, also heretical, and compels him to say that the 
account in Genesis is allegorical. Paradise and the fall are not to be taken literally. Like all 
pantheists, he has difficulties about sin. He holds that man was originally without sin, and when 
he was without sin he was without distinction of sex. This, of course, contradicts the statement 
"male and female created he them." According to John, it was only as the result of sin that 
human beings were divided into male and female. Woman embodies man's sensuous and fallen 
nature. In the end, distinction of sex will again disappear, and we shall have a purely spiritual 
body. ^_Sin consists in misdirected will, in falsely supposing something good which is not so. 

Its punishment is natural; it consists in discovering the vanity of sinful desires. But punishment 
is not eternal. Like Origen, John holds that even the devils will be saved at last, though later 
than other people. 


* Contrast Saint Augustine. 


- 406 - 


John's translation of the pseudo-Dionysius had a great influence on medieval thought, but his 
magnum opus on the division of Nature had very little. It was repeatedly condemned as heretical, 
and at last, in 1225, Pope Honorius III ordered all copies of it to be burnt. Fortunately this order 
was not efficiently carried out. 

CHAPTER IX Ecclesiastical Reform in the Eleventh Century 

FOR the first time since the fall of the Western Empire, Europe, during the eleventh century, 
made rapid progress not subsequently lost. There had been progress of a sort during the 
Carolingian renaissance, but it proved to be not solid. In the eleventh century, the improvement 
was lasting and many-sided. It began with monastic refonn; it then extended to the papacy and 
Church government; towards the end of the century it produced the first scholastic philosophers. 
The Saracens were expelled from Sicily by the Normans; the Hungarians, having become 
Christians, ceased to be marauders; the conquests of the Normans in France and England saved 
those countries from further Scandinavian incursions. Architecture, which had been barbaric 
except where Byzantine influence prevailed, attained sudden sublimity. The level of education 
rose enormously among the clergy, and considerably in the lay aristocracy. 

The reform movement, in its earlier stages, was, in the minds of its promoters, actuated 
exclusively by moral motives. The clergy, both regular and secular, had fallen into bad ways, and 
earnest men set to work to make them live more in accordance with their principles. But behind 
this purely moral motive there was another, at first perhaps unconscious, but gradually becoming 
more and more open. This motive was to complete the separation between clergy and laity, and, in 
so doing, to increase the power of the fonner. It 

-407- 



was therefore natural that the victory of reform in the Church should lead straight on to a violent 
conflict between Emperor and Pope. 

Priests had formed a separate and powerful caste in Egypt, Babylonia, and Persia, but not in 
Greece or Rome. In the primitive Christian Church, the distinction between clergy and laity arose 
gradually; when we read of "bishops" in the New Testament, the word does not mean what it has 
come to mean to us. The separation of the clergy from the rest of the population had two aspects, 
one doctrinal, the other political; the political aspect depended upon the doctrinal. The clergy 
possessed certain miraculous powers, especially in connection with the sacraments— except 
baptism, which could be perfonned by laymen. Without the help of the clergy, marriage, 
absolution, and extreme unction were impossible. Even more important, in the Middle Ages, was 
transubstantiation: only a priest could perform the miracle of the mass. It was not until the 
eleventh century, in 1079, that the doctrine of transubstantiation became an article of faith, though 
it had been generally believed for a long time. 

Owing to their miraculous powers, priests could determine whether a man should spend eternity in 
heaven or in hell. If he died while excommunicate, he went to hell; if he died after priests had 
performed all the proper ceremonies, he would ultimately go to heaven provided he had duly 
repented and confessed. Before going to heaven, however, he would have to spend some time— 
perhaps a very long time— suffering the pains of purgatory. Priests could shorten this time by 
saying masses for his soul, which they were willing to do for a suitable money payment. 

All this, it must be understood, was genuinely and firmly believed both by priests and by laity; it 
was not merely a creed officially professed. Over and over again, the miraculous powers of the 
clergy gave them the victory over powerful princes at the head of their armies. This power, 
however, was limited in two ways: by reckless outbreaks of passion on the part of furious laymen, 
and by divisions among the clergy. The inhabitants of Rome, until the time of Gregory VII, 
showed little respect for the person of the Pope. They would kidnap him, imprison him, poison 
him, or fight against him, whenever their turbulent factional strife tempted them to such action. 
How is this compatible with their beliefs? Partly, no doubt, the explanation lies in mere lack of 
self-control; partly, however, in the 


- 408 - 



thought that one could repent on one's deathbed. Another reason, which operated less in Rome 
than elsewhere, was that kings could bend to their will the bishops in their kingdoms, and thus 
secure enough priestly magic to save themselves from damnation. Church discipline and a 
unified ecclesiastical government were therefore essential to the power of the clergy. These 
ends were secured during the eleventh century, as part and parcel of a moral reformation of the 
clergy. 

The power of the clergy as a whole could only be secured by very considerable sacrifices on the 
part of individual ecclesiastics. The two great evils against which all clerical reformers directed 
their energies were simony and concubinage. Something must be said about each of these. 

Owing to the benefactions of the pious, the Church had become rich. Many bishops had huge 
estates, and even parish priests had, as a rule, what for those times was a comfortable living. 

The appointment of bishops was usually, in practice, in the hands of the king, but sometimes in 
those of some subordinate feudal noble. It was customary for the king to sell bishoprics; this, in 
fact, provided a substantial part of his income. The bishop, in turn, sold such ecclesiastical 
preferment as was in his power. There was no secret about this. Gerbert (Sylvester II) 
represented bishops as saying: "I gave gold and I received the episcopate; but yet I do not fear to 
receive it back if I behave as I should. I ordain a priest and I receive gold; I make a deacon and I 
receive a heap of silver. Behold the gold which I gave I have once more unlessened in my 
purse." ^_Peter Damian in Milan, in 1059, found that every cleric in the city, from the 
archbishop downwards, had been guilty of simony. And this state of affairs was in no way 
exceptional. 

Simony, of course, was a sin, but that was not the only objection to it. It caused ecclesiastical 
preferment to go by wealth, not merit; it confirmed lay authority in the appointment of bishops, 
and episcopal subservience to secular rulers; and it tended to make the episcopate part of the 
feudal system. Moreover, when a man had purchased preferment, he was naturally anxious to 
recoup himself, so that worldly rather than spiritual concerns were likely to preoccupy 


* Cambridge Medieval History, V, Ch. 10. 


- 409 - 


him. For these reasons, the campaign against simony was a necessary part of the ecclesiastical 
struggle for power. 

Very similar considerations applied to clerical celibacy. The reformers of the eleventh century 
often spoke of "concubinage" when it would have been more accurate to speak of "marriage." 
Monks, of course, were precluded from marriage by their vow of chastity, but there had been no 
clear prohibition of marriage for the secular clergy. In the Eastern Church, to this day, parish 
priests are allowed to be married. In the West, in the eleventh century, most parish priests were 
married. Bishops, for their part, appealed to Saint Paul's pronouncement: "A bishop then must 
be blameless, the husband of one wife." f_There was not the same clear moral issue as in the 
matter of simony, but in the insistence on clerical celibacy there were political motives very 

similar to those in the campaign against simony. ^£_ 

When priests were married, they naturally tried to pass on Church property to their sons. They 
could do this legally if their sons became priests; therefore one of the first steps of the reform 
party, when it acquired power, was to forbid the ordination of priests' sons. a€j But in the 
confusion of the times there was still danger that, if priests had sons, they would find means of 
illegally alienating parts of the Church lands. In addition to this economic consideration, there 
was also the fact that, if a priest was a family man like his neighbours, he seemed to them less 
removed from themselves. There was, from at least the fifth century onwards, an intense 
admiration for celibacy, and if the clergy were to command the reverence on which their power 
depended, it was highly advantageous that they should be obviously separated from other men 
by abstinence from marriage. The reformers themselves, no doubt, sincerely believed that the 
married state, though not actually sinful, is lower than the state of celibacy, and is only 
conceded to the weakness of the flesh. Saint Paul says: "If they cannot contain, let them marry;" 
AS b ut a really holy man ought to be able to "contain." Therefore clerical celibacy is essential to 
the moral authority of the Church. 


* I Timothy III, 2. 

A 

„ I Corinthians VII, 9. 

§ 

a 

^ See Henry C. Lea, The History of Sacerdotal Celibacy. 
a 

q In 1046, it was decreed that a clerk's son cannot be a bishop. Later, it was decreed that he 
could not be in holy orders, 
i 


- 410 - 


After these general preliminaries, let us come to the actual history of the reform movement in 
the eleventh-century Church. 

The beginning goes back to the foundation of the abbey of Cluny in 910 by William the Pious, 
Duke of Aquitaine. This abbey was, from the first, independent of all external authority except 
that of the Pope; moreover its abbot was given authority over other monasteries that owed their 
origin to it. Most monasteries, at this time, were rich and lax; Cluny, though avoiding extreme 
asceticism, was careful to preserve decency and decorum. The second abbot, Odo, went to Italy, 
and was given control of several Roman monasteries. He was not always successful: "Farfa, 
divided by a schism between two rival abbots who had murdered their predecessor, resisted the 
introduction of Cluniac monks by Odo and got rid by poison of the abbot whom Alberic 
installed by armed force." ^_( Alberic was the ruler of Rome, who had invited Odo.) In the 
twelfth century Cluny's reforming zeal grew cold. Saint Bernard objected to its fine 
architecture; like all the most earnest men of his time, he considered splendid ecclesiastical 
edifices a sign of sinful pride. 

During the eleventh century, various other orders were founded by reformers. Romuald, an 
ascetic hermit, founded the Camaldolese Order in 1012; Peter Damian, of whom we shall speak 
shortly, was a follower of his. The Carthusians, who never ceased to be austere, were founded 
by Bruno of Cologne in 1084. In 1098 the Cistercian Order was founded, and in 1 1 13 it was 
joined by Saint Bernard. It adhered strictly to the Benedictine Rule. It forbade stained-glass 
windows. For labour, it employed conversi, or lay brethren. These men took the vows, but were 
forbidden to leam reading and writing; they were employed mainly in agriculture, but also in 
other work, such as architecture. Fountains Abbey, in Yorkshire, is Cistercian— a remarkable 
work for men who thought all beauty of the Devil. 

As will be seen from the case of Farfa, which was by no means unique, monastic reformers 
required great courage and energy. Where they succeeded, they were supported by the secular 
authorities. It was these men and their followers who made possible the refonnation, first of the 
papacy, and then of the Church as a whole. 

The refonn of the papacy, however, was, at first, mainly the work 


* Cambridge Medieval History, V, 662. 


- 411 - 


of the Emperor. The last dynastic Pope was Benedict IX, elected in 1032, and said to have been 
only twelve years old at the time. He was the son of Alberic of Tusculum, whom we have already 
met in connection with Abbot Odo. As he grew older, he grew more and more debauched, and 
shocked even the Romans. At last his wickedness reached such a pitch that he decided to resign 
the papacy in order to marry. He sold it to his godfather, who became Gregory VI. This man, 
though he acquired the papacy simoniacally, was a reformer; he was a friend of Hildebrand 
( Gregory VII). The manner of his acquiring the papacy, however, was too scandalous to be passed 
over. The young Emperor Henry III ( 1039-1056) was a pious reformer, who had abandoned 
simony at great cost to his revenue, while retaining the right to appoint bishops. He came to Italy 
in 1046, at the age of twenty-two, and deposed Gregory VI on the charge of simony. 

Henry III retained throughout his reign the power of making and unmaking popes, which, 
however, he exercised wisely in the interests of reform. After getting rid of Gregory VI, he 
appointed a German bishop, Suidger of Bamberg; the Romans resigned the election rights which 
they had claimed and often exercised, almost always badly. The new Pope died next year, and the 
Emperor's next nominee also died almost immediately— of poison, it was said. Henry III then 
chose a relation of his own, Bruno of Toul, who became Leo IX ( 10491054). He was an earnest 
reformer, who travelled much and held many councils; he wished to fight the Normans in 
Southern Italy, but in this he was unsuccessful. Hildebrand was his friend, and might almost be 
called his pupil. At his death the Emperor appointed one more Pope, Gebhard of Eichstadt, who 
became Victor II, in 1055. But the Emperor died the next year, and the Pope the year after. From 
this point onwards, the relations of Emperor and Pope became less friendly. The Pope, having 
acquired moral authority by the help of Henry III, claimed first independence of the Emperor, and 
then superiority to him. Thus began the great conflict which lasted two hundred years and ended 
in the defeat of the Emperor. In the long run, therefore, Henry Ill’s policy of reforming the papacy 
was perhaps short-sighted. 

The next Emperor, Henry IV, reigned for fifty years ( 1056-1 106). At first he was a minor, and the 
regency was exercised by his mother the Empress Agnes. Stephen IX was Pope for one year, and 
at his 


- 412 - 



death the cardinals chose one Pope while the Romans, reasserting the rights they had surrendered, 
chose another. The empress sided with the cardinals, whose nominee took the name of Nicholas 
II. Although his reign only lasted three years, it was important. He made peace with the Normans, 
thereby making the papacy less dependent on the Emperor. In his time the manner in which popes 
were to be elected was determined by a decree, according to which the choice was to be made first 
by the cardinal bishops, then by the other cardinals, and last by the clergy and people of Rome, 
whose participation, one gathers, was to be purely formal. In effect, the cardinal bishops were to 
select the Pope. The election was to take place in Rome if possible, but might take place 
elsewhere if circumstances made election in Rome difficult or undesirable. No part in the election 
was allotted to the Emperor. This decree, which was accepted only after a struggle, was an 
essential step in the emancipation of the papacy from lay control. 

Nicholas II secured a decree that, for the future, ordinations by men guilty of simony were not to 
be valid. The decree was not made retroactive, because to do so would have invalidated the great 
majority of ordinations of existing priests. 

During the pontificate of Nicholas II an interesting struggle began in Milan. The archbishop, 
following the Ambrosian tradition, claimed a certain independence of the Pope. He and his clergy 
were in alliance with the aristocracy, and were strongly opposed to reform. The mercantile and 
lower classes, on the other hand, wished the clergy to be pious; there were riots in support of 
clerical celibacy, and a powerful reform movement, called "Patarine," against the archbishop and 
his supporters. In 1059 the Pope, in support of refonn, sent to Milan as his legate the eminent 
Saint Peter Damian. Damian was the author of a treatise On Divine Omnipotence, which 
maintained that God can do things contrary to the law of contradiction, and can undo the past. 
(This view was rejected by Saint Thomas, and has, since his time, been unorthodox.) He opposed 
dialectic, and spoke of philosophy as the handmaid of theology. He was, as we have seen, a 
follower of the hennit Romuald, and engaged with great reluctance in the conduct of affairs. His 
holiness, however, was such an asset to the papacy that very strong persuasion was brought to bear 
on him to help in the refonn campaign, and he yielded to the Pope's representations. At 


- 413 - 



Milan in 1059 he made a speech against simony to the assembled clerics. At first they were so 
enraged that his life was in danger, but at last his eloquence won them over, and with tears they 
one and all confessed themselves guilty. Moreover they promised obedience to Rome. Under the 
next Pope, there was a dispute with the Emperor about the See of Milan, in which, with the help 
of the Patarines, the Pope was ultimately victorious. 

At the death of Nicholas II in 1061, Henry IV being now of age, there was a dispute between him 
and the cardinals as to the succession to the papacy. The Emperor had not accepted the election 
decree, and was not prepared to forgo his rights in the election of the Pope. The dispute lasted for 
three years, but in the end the cardinals' choice prevailed, without a definite trial of strength 
between Emperor and curia. What turned the scale was the obvious merit of the cardinals' Pope, 
who was a man combining virtue with experience, and a fonner pupil of Lanfranc (afterwards 
archbishop of Canterbury). The death of this Pope, Alexander II, in 1073 was followed by the 
election of Hildebrand ( Gregory VII). 

Gregory VII ( 1073-1085) is one of the most eminent of the Popes. He had long been prominent, 
and had had great influence on papal policy. It was owing to him that Pope Alexander II blessed 
William the Conqueror’s English enterprise; he favoured the Normans both in Italy and in the 
North. He had been a protA©gA© of Gregory VI, who bought the papacy in order to combat 
simony; after the deposition of this Pope, Hildebrand passed two years in exile. Most of the rest of 
his life was spent in Rome. He was not a learned man, but was inspired largely by Saint 
Augustine, whose doctrines he learnt at second-hand from his hero Gregory the Great. After he 
became Pope, he believed himself the mouthpiece of Saint Peter. This gave him a degree of self- 
confidence which, on a mundane calculation, was not justified. He admitted that the Emperor's 
authority was also of divine origin: at first, he compared Pope and Emperor to two eyes; later, 
when quarrelling with the Emperor, to the sun and moon— the Pope, of course, being the sun. The 
Pope must be supreme in morals, and must therefore have the right to depose the Emperor if the 
Emperor was immoral. And nothing could be more immoral than resisting the Pope. All this he 
genuinely and profoundly believed. 

Gregory VII did more than any previous Pope to enforce clerical 


- 414 - 



celibacy. In Germany the clergy objected, and on this ground as well as others were inclined to 
side with the Emperor. The laity, however, everywhere preferred their priests celibate. Gregory 
stirred up riots of the laity against married priests and their wives, in which both often suffered 
brutal ill-treatment. He called on the laity not to attend mass when celebrated by a recalcitrant 
priest. He decreed that the sacraments of married clergy were invalid, and that such clergy must 
not enter churches. All this roused clerical opposition and lay support; even in Rome, where Popes 
had usually gone in danger of their lives, he was popular with the people. 

In Gregory's time began the great dispute concerning "investitures." When a bishop was 
consecrated, he was invested with a ring and staff as symbols of his office. These had been given 
by Emperor or king (according to the locality), as the bishop's feudal overlord. Gregory insisted 
that they should be given by the Pope. The dispute was part of the work of detaching the 
ecclesiastical from the feudal hierarchy. It lasted a long time, but in the end the papacy was 
completely victorious. 

The quarrel which led to Canossa began over the archbishopric of Milan. In 1075 the Emperor, 
with the concurrence of the suffragans, appointed an archbishop; the Pope considered this an 
infringement of his prerogative, and threatened the Emperor with excommunication and 
deposition. The Emperor retaliated by summoning a council of bishops at Worms, where the 
bishops renounced their allegiance to the Pope. They wrote him a letter accusing him of adultery 
and perjury, and (worse than either) ill-treatment of bishops. The Emperor also wrote him a letter, 
claiming to be above all earthly judgment. The Emperor and his bishops pronounced Gregory 
deposed; Gregory excommunicated the Emperor and his bishops, and pronounced them deposed. 
Thus the stage was set. 

In the first act, victory went to the Pope. The Saxons, who had before rebelled against Henry IV 
and then made peace with him, rebelled again; the German bishops made their peace with 
Gregory. The world at large was shocked by the Emperor's treatment of the Pope. Accordingly in 
the following year ( 1077) Henry decided to seek absolution from the Pope. In the depth of winter, 
with his wife and infant son and a few attendants, he crossed the Mont Cenis pass, and presented 
himself as a suppliant before the castle of Canossa, 


- 415 - 



where the Pope was. For three days the Pope kept him waiting, barefoot and in penitential garb. At 
last he was admitted. Having expressed penitence and sworn, in future, to follow the Pope's 
directions in dealing with his German opponents, he was pardoned and received back into 
communion. 

The Pope's victory, however, was illusory. He had been caught out by the rules of his own 
theology, one of which enjoined absolution for penitents. Strange to say, he was taken in by 
Henry, and supposed his repentance sincere. He soon discovered his mistake. He could no longer 
support Henry's German enemies, who felt that he had betrayed them. From this moment, things 
began to go against him. 

Henry's German enemies elected a rival Emperor, named Rudolf. The Pope, at first, while 
maintaining that it was for him to decide between Henry and Rudolf, refused to come to a 
decision. At last, in 1080, having experienced the insincerity of Henry's repentance, he 
pronounced for Rudolf. By this time, however, Henry had got the better of most of his opponents 
in Gennany. He had an antipope elected by his clerical supporters, and with him, in 1084, he 
entered Rome. His antipope duly crowned him, but both had to retreat quickly before the 
Nonnans, who advanced to the relief of Gregory. The Normans brutally sacked Rome, and took 
Gregory away with them. He remained virtually their prisoner until his death the next year. 

Thus his policies appeared to have ended in disaster. But in fact they were pursued, with more 
moderation, by his successors. A compromise favourable to the papacy was patched up for the 
moment, but the conflict was essentially irreconcilable. Its later stages will be dealt with in a 
subsequent chapter. 

It remains to say something of the intellectual revival in the eleventh century. The tenth century 
was destitute of philosophers, except for Gerbert ( Pope Sylvester II, 999-1003), and even he was 
more a mathematician than a philosopher. But as the eleventh century advanced, men of real 
philosophical eminence began to appear. Of these, the most important were Anselm and Roscelin, 
but some others deserve mention. All were monks connected with the reform movement. 

Peter Damian, the oldest of them, has already been mentioned. Berengar of Tours (d. 1088) is 
interesting as being something of a rationalist. He maintained that reason is superior to authority, 
in sup- 


- 416 - 



port of which view he appealed to John the Scot, who was therefore posthumously condemned. 
Berengar denied transubstantiation, and was twice compelled to recant. His heresies were 
combated by Lanfranc in his book De corpore et sanguine Domini. Lanfranc was bom at Pavia, 
studied law at Bologna, and became a first-rate dialectician. But he abandoned dialectic for 
theology, and entered the monastery of Bee, in Normandy, where he conducted a school. William 
the Conqueror made him archbishop of Canterbury in 1070. 

Saint Anselm was, like Lanfranc, an Italian, a monk at Bee, and archbishop of Canterbury ( 1093- 
1 109), in which capacity he followed the principles of Gregory VII and quarrelled with the king. 
He is chiefly known to fame as the inventor of the "ontological argument" for the existence of 
God. As he put it, the argument is as follows: We define "God" as the greatest possible object of 
thought. Now if an object of thought does not exist, another, exactly like it, which does exist, is 
greater. Therefore the greatest of all objects of thought must exist, since, otherwise, another, still 
greater, would be possible. Therefore God exists. 

This argument has never been accepted by theologians. It was adversely criticized at the time; then 
it was forgotten till the latter half of the thirteenth century. Thomas Aquinas rejected it, and 
among theologians his authority has prevailed ever since. But among philosophers it has had a 
better fate. Descartes revived it in a somewhat amended form; Leibniz thought that it could be 
made valid by the addition of a supplement to prove that God is possible. Kant considered that he 
had demolished it once for all. Nevertheless, in some sense, it underlies the system of Hegel and 
his followers, and reappears in Bradley's principle: "What may be and must be, is." 

Clearly an argument with such a distinguished history is to be treated with respect, whether valid 
or not. The real question is: Is there anything we can think of which, by the mere fact that we can 
think of it, is shown to exist outside our thought? Every philosopher would like to say yes, 
because a philosopher's job is to find out things about the world by thinking rather than observing. 
If yes is the right answer, there is a bridge from pure thought to things; if not, not. In this 
generalized form, Plato uses a kind of ontological argument to prove the objective reality of ideas. 
But no one before Anselm had 


- 417 - 



stated the argument in its naked logical purity. In gaining purity, it loses plausibility; but this also 
is to Anselm’s credit. 

For the rest, Anselm's philosophy is mainly derived from Saint Augustine, from whom it acquires 
many Platonic elements. He believes in Platonic ideas, from which he derives another proof of the 
existence of God. By Neoplatonic arguments he professes to prove not only God, but the Trinity. 
(It will be remembered that Plotinus has a Trinity, though not one that a Christian can accept as 
orthodox.) Anselm considers reason subordinate to faith. "I believe in order to understand," he 
says; following Augustine, he holds that without belief it is impossible to understand. God, he 
says, is not just, but justice. It will be remembered that John the Scot says similar things. The 
common origin is in Plato. 

Saint Anselm, like his predecessors in Christian philosophy, is in the Platonic rather than the 
Aristotelian tradition. For this reason, he has not the distinctive characteristics of the philosophy 
which is called "scholastic," which culminated in Thomas Aquinas. This kind of philosophy may 
be reckoned as beginning with Roscelin, who was Anselm’s contemporary, being seventeen years 
younger than Anselm. Roscelin marks a new beginning, and will be considered in the next 
chapter. 

When it is said that medieval philosophy, until the thirteenth century, was mainly Platonic, it must 
be remembered that Plato, except for a fragment of the Timaeus, was kn own only at second or 
third hand. John the Scot, for example, could not have held the views which he did hold but for 
Plato, but most of what is Platonic in him comes from the pseudo-Dionysius. The date of this 
author is uncertain, but it seems probable that he was a disciple of Proclus the Neoplatonist. It is 
probable, also, that John the Scot had never heard of Proclus or read a line of Plotinus. Apart from 
the pseudo-Dionysius, the other source of Platonism in the Middle Ages was Boethius. This 
Platonism was in many ways different from that which a modem student derives from Plato's own 
writings. It omitted almost everything that had no obvious bearing on religion, and in religious 
philosophy it enlarged and emphasized certain aspects at the expense of others. This change in the 
conception of Plato had already been effected by Plotinus. The knowledge of Aristotle was also 
fragmentary, but in an opposite direction: all that was known of him until the twelfth 


- 418 - 



century was Boethius translation of the Categories and De Emendatione. Thus Aristotle was 
conceived as a mere dialectician, and Plato as only a religious philosopher and the author of the 
theory of ideas. During the course of the later Middle Ages, both these partial conceptions were 
gradually emended, especially the conception of Aristotle. But the process, as regards Plato, 
was not completed until the Renaissance. 

CHAPTER X Mohammedan Culture and Philosophy 

THE attacks upon the Eastern Empire, Africa, and Spain differed from those of Northern 
barbarians on the West in two respects: first, the Eastern Empire survived till 1453, nearly a 
thousand years longer than the Western; second, the main attacks upon the Eastern Empire were 
made by Mohammedans, who did not become Christians after conquest, but developed an 
important civilization of their own. 

The Hegira, ^_with which the Mohammedan era begins, took place in A.D. 622; Mahomet died 
ten years later. Immediately after his death the Arab conquests began, and they proceeded with 
extraordinary rapidity. In the East, Syria was invaded in 634, and completely subdued within 
two years. In 637 Persia was invaded; in 650 its conquest was completed. India was invaded in 
664; Constantinople was besieged in 669 (and again in 716-17). The westward movement was 
not quite so sudden. Egypt was conquered by 642, Carthage not till 697. Spain, except for a 
small comer in the north-west, was acquired in 711-12. Westward expansion (except in Sicily 
and Southern Italy) was brought to a standstill by the defeat of the Mohammedans at the battle 
of Tours in 732, just one hundred years after the death of the 


* The Hegira was Mahomet's flight from Mecca to Medina. 


- 419 - 


Prophet. (The Ottoman Turks, who finally conquered Constantinople, belong to a later period than 
that with which we are now concerned.) 

Various circumstances facilitated this expansion. Persia and the Eastern Empire were exhausted 
by their long wars. The Syrians, who were largely Nestorian, suffered persecution at the hands of 
the Catholics, whereas Mohammedans tolerated all sects of Christians in return for the payment of 
tribute. Similarly in Egypt the Monophysites, who were the bulk of the population, welcomed the 
invaders. In Africa, the Arabs allied themselves with the Berbers, whom the Romans had never 
thoroughly subdued. Arabs and Berbers together invaded Spain, where they were helped by the 
Jews, whom the Visigoths had severely persecuted. 

The religion of the Prophet was a simple monotheism, uncomplicated by the elaborate theology of 
rite Trinity and the Incarnation. The Prophet made no claim to be divine, nor did his followers 
make such a claim on his behalf. He revived the Jewish prohibition of graven images, and forbade 
the use of wine. It was the duty of the faithful to conquer as much of the world as possible for 
Islam, but there was to be no persecution of Christians, Jews, or Zoroastrians-the "people of the 
Book," as the Koran calls them, i.e., those who followed the teaching of a Scripture. 

Arabia was largely desert, and was growing less and less capable of supporting its population. The 
first conquests of the Arabs began as mere raids for plunder, and only turned into pennanent 
occupation after experience had shown the weakness of the enemy. Suddenly, in the course of 
some twenty years, men accustomed to all the hardships of a meagre existence on the fringe of the 
desert found themselves masters of some of the richest regions of the world, able to enjoy every 
luxury and to acquire all the refinements of an ancient civilization. They withstood the 
temptations of this transformation better than most of the Northern barbarians had done. As they 
had acquired their empire without much severe fighting, there had been little destruction, and the 
civil administration was kept on almost unchanged. Both in Persia and in the Byzantine Empire, 
the civil government had been highly organized. The Arab tribesmen, at first, understood nothing 
of its complications, and perforce accepted the services of the trained men whom they found in 
charge. These men, for the most part, 


- 420 - 



showed no reluctance to serve under their new masters. Indeed, the change made their work 
easier, since taxation was lightened very considerably. The populations, moreover, in order to 
escape the tribute, very largely abandoned Christianity for Islam. 

The Arab Empire was an absolute monarchy, under the caliph, who was the successor of the 
Prophet, and inherited much of his holiness. The caliphate was nominally elective, but soon 
became hereditary. The first dynasty, that of the Umayyads, which lasted till 750, was founded by 
men whose acceptance of Mahomet was purely political, and it remained always opposed to the 
more fanatical among the faithful. The Arabs, although they conquered a great part of the world in 
the name of a new religion, were not a very religious race; the motive of their conquests was 
plunder and wealth rather than religion. It was only in virtue of their lack of fanaticism that a 
handful of warriors were able to govern, without much difficulty, vast populations of higher 
civilization and alien religion. 

The Persians, on the contrary, have been, from the earliest times, deeply religious and highly 
speculative. After their conversion, they made out of Islam something much more interesting, 
more religious, and more philosophical, than had been imagined by the Prophet and his kinsmen. 
Ever since the death of Mahomet's son-in-law Ali in 66 1 , Mohammedans have been divided into 
two sects, the Sunni and the Shiah. The fonner is the larger; the latter follows Ali, and considers 
the Umayyad dynasty to have been usurpers. The Persians have always belonged to the Shiah sect. 
Largely by Persian influence, the Umayyads were at last overthrown, and succeeded by the 
Abbasids, who represented Persian interests. The change was marked by the removal of the capital 
from Damascus to Baghdad. 

The Abbasids were, politically, more in favour of the fanatics than the Umayyads had been. They 
did not, however, acquire the whole of the empire. One member of the Umayyad family escaped 
the general massacre, fled to Spain, and was there acknowledged as the legitimate ruler. From that 
time on, Spain was independent of the rest of the Mohammedan world. 

Under the early Abbasids the caliphate attained its greatest splendour. The best known of them is 
Harun-al-Rashid (d. 809), who was a contemporary of Charlemagne and the Empress Irene and is 
known 


- 421 - 



to every one in legendary form through the Arabian Nights. His court was a brilliant centre of 
luxury, poetry, and learning; his revenue was enormous; his empire stretched from the Straits of 
Gibraltar to the Indus. His will was absolute; he was habitually accompanied by the 
executioner, who performed his office at a nod from the caliph. This splendour, however, was 
short-lived. His successor made the mistake of composing his army mainly of Turks, who were 
insubordinate, and soon reduced the caliph to a cipher, to be blinded or murdered whenever the 
soldiery grew tired of him. Nevertheless, the caliphate lingered on; the last caliph of the 
Abbasid dynasty was put to death by the Mongols in 1256, along with 800,000 of the 
inhabitants of Baghdad. 

The political and social system of the Arabs had defects similar to those of the Roman Empire, 
together with some others. Absolute monarchy combined with polygamy led, as it usually does, 
to dynastic wars whenever a ruler died, ending with the victory of one of the ruler's sons and the 
death of all the rest. There were immense numbers of slaves, largely as a result of successful 
wars; at times there were dangerous servile insurrections. Commerce was greatly developed, the 
more so as the caliphate occupied a central position between East and West. "Not only did the 
possession of enormous wealth create a demand for costly articles, such as silks from China and 
furs from Northern Europe, but trade was promoted by certain special conditions, such as the 
vast extent of the Muslim empire, the spread of Arabic as a world-language, and the exalted 
status assigned to the merchant in the Muslim system of ethics; it was remembered that the 
Prophet himself had been a merchant and had commended trading during the pilgrimage to 
Mecca." ^_This commerce, like military cohesion, depended on the great roads which the Arabs 
inherited from Romans and Persians, and which they, unlike the Northern conquerors, did not 
allow to fall into disrepair. Gradually, however, the empire broke up into fractions— Spain, 
Persia, North Africa, and Egypt successively split off and acquired complete or almost complete 
independence. 

One of the best features of the Arab economy was agriculture, particularly the skilful use of 
irrigation, which they leamt from living 


* Cambridge Medieval History, IV, 286. 


- 422 - 


where water is scarce. To this day Spanish agriculture profits by Arab irrigation works. 

The distinctive culture of the Muslim world, though it began in Syria, soon came to flourish most 
in the Eastern and Western extremities, Persia and Spain. The Syrians, at the time of the conquest, 
were admirers of Aristotle, whom Nestorians preferred to Plato, the philosopher favoured by 
Catholics. The Arabs first acquired their knowledge of Greek philosophy from the Syrians, and 
thus, from the beginning, they thought Aristotle more important than Plato. Nevertheless, their 
Aristotle wore a Neoplatonic dress. Kindi (d. ca. 873), the first to write philosophy in Arabic, and 
the only philosopher of note who was himself an Arab, translated parts of the Enneads of Plotinus, 
and published his translation under the title The Theology of Aristotle. This introduced great 
confusion into Arabic ideas of Aristotle, from which it took Arabic philosophy centuries to 
recover. 

Meanwhile, in Persia, Muslims came in contact with India. It was from Sanskrit writings that they 
acquired, during the eighth century, their first knowledge of astronomy. About 830, Muhammad 
ibn Musa al-Khwarazmi, a translator of mathematical and astronomical books from the Sanskrit, 
published a book which was translated into Latin in the twelfth century, under the title Algoritmi 
de numero Indorum. It was from this book that the West first learnt of what we call "Arabic" 
numerals, which ought to be called "Indian." The same author wrote a book on algebra which was 
used in the West as a text, book until the sixteenth century. 

Persian civilization remained both intellectually and artistically admirable until the invasion of the 
Mongols in the thirteenth century, from which it never recovered. Omar KhayyAjm, the only man 
kn own to me who was both a poet and a mathematician, refonned the calendar in 1079. His best 
friend, oddly enough, was the founder of the sect of the Assassins, the "Old Man of the Mountain" 
of legendary fame. The Persians were great poets: Firdousi (ca. 941), author of the Shahnama, is 
said by those who have read him to be the equal of Homer. They were also remarkable as mystics, 
which other Mohammedans were not. The Sufi sect, which still exists, allowed itself great latitude 
in the mystical and allegorical interpretation of orthodox dogma; it was more or less Neoplatonic. 

The Nestorians, through whom, at first, Greek influences came 


- 423 - 



into the Muslim world, were by no means purely Greek in their outlook. Their school at Edessa 
had been closed by the Emperor Zeno in 481; its learned men thereupon migrated to Persia, where 
they continued their work, but not without suffering Persian influences. The Nestorians valued 
Aristotle only for his logic, and it was above all his logic that the Arabic philosophers thought 
important at first. Later, however, they studied also his Metaphysics and his DeAnima. Arabic 
philosophers, in general, are encyclopedic: they are interested in alchemy, astrology, astronomy, 
and zoology, as much as in what we should call philosophy. They were looked upon with 
suspicion by the populace, which was fanatical and bigoted; they owed their safety (when they 
were safe) to the protection of comparatively freethinking princes. 

Two Mohammedan philosophers, one of Persia, one of Spain, demand special notice; they are 
Avicenna and Averroes. Of these the former is the more famous among Mohammedans, the latter 
among Christians. 

Avicenna (Ibn Sina) ( 980-1037) spent his life in the sort of places that one used to think only 
exist in poetry. He was born in the province of Bokhara; at the age of twenty-four he went to 
Kh iva— ’’lone Khiva in the waste"— then to Khorassan— "the lone Chorasmian shore." For a while 
he taught medicine and philosophy at Ispahan; then he settled at Teheran. He was even more 
famous in medicine than in philosophy, though he added little to Galen. From the twelfth to the 
seventeenth century, he was used in Europe as a guide to medicine. He was not a saintly character, 
in fact he had a passion for wine and women. He was suspect to the orthodox, but was befriended 
by princes on account of his medical skill. At times he got into trouble owing to the hostility of 
Turkish mercenaries; sometimes he was in hiding, sometimes in prison. He was the author of an 
encyclopAjdia, almost unknown to the East because of the hostility of theologians, but influential 
in the West through Latin translations. His psychology has an empirical tendency. 

His philosophy is nearer to Aristotle, and less Neoplatonic, than that of his Muslim predecessors. 
Like the Christian scholastics later, he is occupied with the problem of universals. Plato said they 
were anterior to things. Aristotle has two views, one when he is thinking, 


- 424 - 



the other when he is combating Plato. This makes him ideal material for the commentator. 

Avicenna invented a formula, which was repeated by Averroes and Albertus Magnus: "Thought 
brings about the generality in forms." From this it might be supposed that he did not believe in 
universals apart from thought. This, however, would be an unduly simple view. Genera— that is, 
universals— are, he says, at once before things, in things, and after things. He explains this as 
follows. They are before things in God's understanding. (God decides, for instance, to create 
cats. This requires that He should have the idea "cat," which is thus, in this respect, anterior to 
particular cats.) Genera are in things in natural objects. (When cats have been created, felinity is 
in each of them.) Genera are after things in our thought. (When we have seen many cats, we 
notice their likeness to each other, and arrive at the general idea "cat.") This view is obviously 
intended to reconcile different theories. 

Averroes (Ibn Rushd) ( 1 126-1 198) lived at the opposite end of the Muslim world from 
Avicenna. He was born at Cordova, where his father and grandfather had been cadis; he himself 
was a cadi, first in Seville, then in Cordova. He studied, first, theology and jurisprudence, then 
medicine, mathematics, and philosophy. He was recommended to the "Caliph" Abu Yaqub 
Yusuf as a man capable of making an analysis of the works of Aristotle. (It seems, however, 
that he did not kn ow Greek.) This ruler took him into favour; in 1184 he made him his 
physician, but unfortunately the patient died two years later. His successor, Yaqub Al-Mansur, 
for eleven years continued his father's patronage; then, alarmed by the opposition of the 
orthodox to the philosopher, he deprived him of his position, and exiled him, first to a small 
place near Cordova, and then to Morocco. He was accused of cultivating the philosophy of the 
ancients at the expense of the true faith. Al-Mansur published an edict to the effect that God had 
decreed hell-fire for those who thought that truth could be found by the unaided reason. All the 
books that could be found on logic and metaphysics were given to the flames, f 

Shortly after this time the Moorish territory in Spain was greatly diminished by Christian 
conquests. Muslim philosophy in Spain ended 


* It is said that Averroes was taken back into favour shortly before his death. 


- 425 - 


with Averroes; and in the rest of the Mohammedan world a rigid orthodoxy put an end to 
speculation. 

Ueberweg, rather amusingly, undertakes to defend Averroes against the charge of unorthodoxy— a 
matter, one would say, for Muslims to decide. Ueberweg points out that, according to the mystics, 
every text of the Koran had 7 or 70 or 700 layers of interpretation, the literal meaning being only 
for the ignorant vulgar. It would seem to follow that a philosopher's teaching could not possibly 
conflict with the Koran; for among 700 interpretations there would surely be at least one that 
would fit what the philosopher had to say. In the Mohammedan world, however, the ignorant 
seem to have objected to all learning that went beyond a knowledge of the Holy Book; it was 
dangerous, even if no specific heresy could be demonstrated. The view of the mystics, that the 
populace should take the Koran literally but wise people need not do so, was hardly likely to win 
wide popular acceptance. 

Averroes was concerned to improve the Arabic interpretation of Aristotle, which had been unduly 
influenced by Neoplatonism. He gave to Aristotle the sort of reverence that is given to the founder 
of a religion— much more than was given even by Avicenna. He holds that the existence of God 
can be proved by reason independently of revelation, a view also held by Thomas Aquinas. As 
regards immortality, he seems to have adhered closely to Aristotle, maintaining that the soul is not 
immortal, but intellect (nous) is. This, however, does not secure personal immortality, since 
intellect is one and the same when manifested in different persons. This view, naturally, was 
combated by Christian philosophers. 

Averroes, like most of the later Mohammedan philosophers, though a believer, was not rigidly 
orthodox. There was a sect of completely orthodox theologians, who objected to all philosophy as 
deleterious to the faith. One of these, named Algazel, wrote a book called Destruction of the 
Philosophers, pointing out that, since all necessary truth is in the Koran, there is no need of 
speculation independent of revelation. Averroes replied by a book called Destruction of the 
Destruction. The religious dogmas that Algazel specially upheld against the philosophers were the 
creation of the world in time out of nothing, the reality of the divine attributes, and the 
resurrection of the body. Averroes regards religion as containing philosophic truth in allegorical 
form. This applies in particular to creation, which he, 


- 426 - 



in his philosophic capacity, interprets in an Aristotelian fashion. Averroes is more important in 
Christian than in Mohammedan philosophy. In the latter he was a dead end; in the former, a 
beginning. He was translated into Latin early in the thirteenth century by Michael Scott; as his 
works belong to the latter half of the twelfth century, this is surprising. His influence in Europe 
was very great, not only on the scholastics, but also on a large body of unprofessional free- 
thinkers, who denied immortality and were called Averroists. Among professional philosophers, 
his admirers were at first especially among the Franciscans and at the University of Paris. But this 
is a topic which will be dealt with in a later chapter. 

Arabic philosophy is not important as original thought. Men like Avicenna and Averroes are 
essentially commentators. Speaking generally, the views of the more scientific philosophers come 
from Aristotle and the Neoplatonists in logic and metaphysics, from Galen in medicine, from 
Greek and Indian sources in mathematics and astronomy, and among mystics religious philosophy 
has also an admixture of old Persian beliefs. Writers in Arabic showed some originality in 
mathematics and in chemistry— in the latter case, as an incidental result of alchemical researches. 
Mohammedan civilization in its great days was admirable in the arts and in many technical ways, 
but it showed no capacity for independent speculation in theoretical matters. Its importance, which 
must not be underrated, is as a transmitter. Between ancient and modern European civilization, the 
dark ages intervened. The Mohammedans and the Byzantines, while lacking the intellectual 
energy required for innovation, preserved the apparatus of civilization— education, books, and 
learned leisure. Both stimulated the West when it emerged from barbarism— the Mohammedans 
chiefly in the thirteenth century, the Byzantines chiefly in the fifteenth. In each case the stimulus 
produced new thought better than any produced by the transmitters— in the one case scholasticism, 
in the other the Renaissance (which however had other causes also). 

Between the Spanish Moors and the Christians, the Jews fonned a useful link. There were many 
Jews in Spain, who remained when the country was reconquered by the Christians. Since they 
knew Arabic, and perforce acquired the language of the Christians, they were able to supply 
translations. Another means of transfusion arose through Mohammedan persecution of 
Aristotelians in the thirteenth 


-427- 

century, which led Moorish philosophers to take refuge with Jews, especially in Provence. The 
Spanish Jews produced one philosopher of importance, Maimonides. He was bom in Cordova 
in 1 135, but went to Cairo. at the age of thirty, and stayed there for the rest of his life. He wrote 
in Arabic, but was immediately translated into Hebrew. A few decades after his death, he was 
translated into Latin, probably at the request of the Emperor Frederick II. He wrote a book 
called Guide to Wanderers, addressed to philosophers who have lost their faith. Its purpose is to 
reconcile Aristotle with Jewish theology. Aristotle is the authority on the sublunary world, 
revelation on the heavenly. But philosophy and revelation come together in the knowledge of 
God. The pursuit of truth is a religious duty. Astrology is rejected. The Pentateuch is not always 
to be taken literally; when the literal sense conflicts with reason, we must seek an allegorical 
interpretation. As against Aristotle, he maintains that God created not only fonn, but matter, out 
of nothing. He gives a summary of the Timaeus (which he knew in Arabic), preferring it on 
some points to Aristotle. The essence of God is unknowable, being above all predicated 
perfections. The Jews considered him heretical, and went so far as to invoke the Christian 
ecclesiastical authorities against him. Some think that he influenced Spinoza, but this is very 
questionable. 

CHAPTER XI The Twelfth Century 

FOUR aspects of the twelfth century are specially interesting to us: 



(1) The continued conflict of empire and papacy; 

(2) The rise of the Lombard cities; 

(3) The Crusades; and 

(4) The growth of scholasticism. 

All these four continued into the following century. The Crusades gradually came to an 
inglorious end; but, as regards the other three 


-428- 

movements, the thirteenth century, marks the culmination of what, in the twelfth, is in a 
transitional stage. In the thirteenth century, the Pope definitively triumphed over the Emperor, the 
Lombard cities acquired secure independence, and scholasticism reached its highest point. All 
this, however, was an outcome of what the twelfth century had prepared. 

Not only the first of these four movements, but the other three also, are intimately bound up with 
the increase of papal and ecclesiastical power. The Pope was in alliance with the Lombard cities 
against the Emperor; Pope Urban II inaugurated the first Crusade, and subsequent popes were the 
main promoters of the later ones; the scholastic philosophers were all clerics, and Church councils 
took care to keep them within the bounds of orthodoxy, or discipline them if they strayed. 
Undoubtedly, their sense of the political triumph of the Church, in which they felt themselves 
participants, stimulated their intellectual initiative. 

One of the curious things about the Middle Ages is that they were original and creative without 
knowing it. All parties justified their policies by antiquarian and archaistic arguments. The 
Emperor appealed, in Germany, to the feudal principles of the time of Charlemagne; in Italy, to 
Roman law and the power of ancient Emperors. The Lombard cities went still further back, to the 
institutions of republican Rome. The papal party based its claims partly on the forged Donation of 
Constantine, partly on the relations of Saul and Samuel as told in the Old Testament. The 
scholastics appealed either to the Scriptures or at first to Plato and then to Aristotle; when they 
were original, they tried to conceal the fact. The Crusades were an endeavour to restore the state 
of affairs that had existed before the rise of Islam. 

We must not be deceived by this literary archaism. Only in the case of the Emperor did it 
correspond with the facts. Feudalism was in decay, especially in Italy; the Roman Empire was a 
mere memory. Accordingly, the Emperor was defeated. The cities of North Italy, while, in their 
later development, they showed much similarity to the cities of ancient Greece, repeated the 
pattern, not from imitation, but from analogy of circumstances: that of small, rich, highly civilized 
republican commercial communities surrounded by monarchies at a lower level of culture. The 
scholastics, however they might revere 


- 429 - 



Aristotle, showed more originality than any of the Arabs— more, indeed, than any one since 
Plotinus, or at any rate since Augustine. In politics as in thought, there was the same disguised 
originality. 


CONFLICT OF EMPIRE AND PAPACY 

From the time of Gregory VII to the middle of the thirteenth century, European history centres 
round the struggle for power between the Church and the lay monarchs— primarily the Emperor, 
but also, on occasion, the kings of France and England. Gregory's pontificate had ended in 
apparent disaster, but his policies were resumed, though with more moderation, by Urban II 
( 1088-1099), who repeated the decrees against lay investiture, and desired episcopal elections to 
be made freely by clergy and people. (The share of the people was, no doubt, to be purely formal.) 
In practice, however, he did not quarrel with lay appointments if they were good. 

At first, Urban was safe only in Nonnan territory. But in 1093 Henry IV’s son Conrad rebelled 
against his father, and, in alliance with the Pope, conquered North Italy, where the Lombard 
League, an alliance of cities with Milan at its head, favoured the Pope. In 1094, Urban made a 
triumphal procession through North Italy and France. He triumphed over Philip, King of France, 
who desired a divorce, and was therefore excommunicated by the Pope, and then submitted. At 
the Council of Clermont, in 1095, Urban proclaimed the first Crusade, which produced a wave of 
religious enthusiasm leading to increase of papal power— also to atrocious pogroms of Jews. The 
last year of Urban's life he spent in safety in Rome, where popes were seldom safe. 

The next Pope, Paschal II, like Urban, came from Cluny. He continued the struggle on 
investitures, and was successful in France and England. But after the death of Henry IV in 1 106, 
the next Emperor, Henry V, got the better of the Pope, who was an unworldly man and allowed 
his saintliness to outweigh his political sense. The Pope proposed that the Emperor should 
renounce investitures, but in return bishops and abbots should renounce temporal possessions. The 
Emperor professed to agree; but when the suggested compromise was 


- 430 - 



made public, the ecclesiastics rebelled furiously against the Pope. The Emperor, who was in 
Rome, took the opportunity to seize the Pope, who yielded to threats, gave way on investitures, 
and crowned Henry V. Eleven years later, however, by the Concordat of Worms in 1 122, Pope 
Calixtus II compelled Henry V to give way on investitures, and to surrender control over episcopal 
elections in Burgundy and Italy. 

So far, the net result of the struggle was that the Pope, who had been subject to Henry III, had 
become the equal of the Emperor. At the same time, he had become more completely sovereign in 
the Church, which he governed by means of legates. This increase of papal power had diminished 
the relative importance of bishops. Papal elections were now free from lay control, and 
ecclesiastics generally were more virtuous than they had been before the reform movement. 

RISE OF THE LOMBARD CITIES 

The next stage was connected with the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa ( 1152-1190), an able and 
energetic man, who would have succeeded in any enterprise in which success was possible. He 
was a man of education, who read Latin with pleasure, though he spoke it with difficulty. His 
classical learning was considerable, and he was an admirer of Roman law. He thought of himself 
as the heir of the Roman emperors, and hoped to acquire their power. But as a German he was 
unpopular in Italy. The Lombard cities, while willing to acknowledge his fonnal overlordship, 
objected when he interfered in their affairs— except those which feared Milan, against which city 
some of them invoked his protection. The Patarine movement in Milan continued, and was 
associated with a more or less democratic tendency; most, but by no means all, of the North Italian 
cities sympathized with Milan, and made common cause against the Emperor. 

Hadrian IV, a vigorous Englishman who had been a missionary in Norway, became Pope two 
years after the accession of Barbarossa, and was, at first, on good tenns with him. They were 
reconciled by a common enmity. The city of Rome claimed independence from both 


- 431 - 



alike, and, as a help in the struggle, had invited a saintly heretic, Arnold of Brescia. ^_His heresy 
was very grave: he maintained that "clerks who have estates, bishops who hold fiefs, monks 
who possess property, cannot be saved." He held this view because he thought that the clergy 
ought to devote themselves entirely to spiritual matters. No one questioned his sincere austerity, 
although he was accounted wicked on account of his heresy. Saint Bernard, who vehemently 
opposed him, said, "He neither eats nor drinks, but only, like the Devil, hungers and thirsts for 
the blood of souls." Hadrian’s predecessor in the papacy had written to Barbarossa to complain 
that Arnold supported the popular faction, which wished to elect one hundred senators and two 
consuls, and to have an Emperor of their own. Frederick, who was setting out for Italy, was 
naturally scandalized. The Roman demand for communal liberty, which was encouraged by 
Arnold, led to a riot in which a cardinal was killed. The newly-elected Pope Hadrian thereupon 
placed Rome under an interdict. It was Holy Week, and superstition got the better of the 
Romans; they submitted, and promised to banish Arnold. He hid, but was captured by the 
Emperor's troops. He was burnt, and his ashes were thrown into the Tiber, for fear of their being 
preserved as holy relics. After a delay caused by Frederick's unwillingness to hold the Pope's 
bridle and stirrup while he dismounted, the Pope crowned the Emperor in 1155 amid the 
resistance of the populace, which was quelled with great slaughter. 

The honest man being disposed of, the practical politicians were free to resume their quarrel. 

The Pope, having made peace with the Normans, ventured in 1157 to break with the Emperor. 
For twenty years there was almost continuous war between the Emperor on the one side, and the 
Pope with the Lombard cities on the other. The Normans mostly supported the Pope. The bulk 
of the fighting against the Emperor was done by the Lombard League, which spoke of "liberty" 
and was inspired by intense popular feeling. The Emperor besieged various cities, and in 1162 
even captured Milan, which he razed to the ground, compelling its citizens to live elsewhere. 

But five years later the League rebuilt Milan and the fonner inhabitants returned. In this same 
year, the 


* He was said to be a pupil of AbA©lard, but this is doubtful. 


- 432 - 


Emperor, duly provided with an antipope, ^marched on Rome with a great army. The Pope 
fled, and his cause seemed desperate, but pestilence destroyed Frederick's army, and he returned 
to Germany a solitary fugitive. Although not only Sicily, but the Greek Emperor, now sided 
with the Lombard League, Barbarossa made another attempt, ending in his defeat at the battle of 
Legnano in 1176. After this he was compelled to make peace, leaving to the cities an the 
substance of liberty. In the conflict between Empire and papacy, however, the terms of peace 
gave neither party complete victory. 

Barbarossa's end was seemly. In 1189 he went on the third Crusade, and in the following year 
he died. 

The rise of free cities is what proved of most ultimate importance in this long strife. The power 
of the Emperor was associated with the decaying feudal system; the power of the Pope, though 
still growing, was largely dependent upon the world’s need of him as an antagonist to the 
Emperor, and therefore decayed when the Empire ceased to be a menace; but the power of the 
cities was new, a result of economic progress, and a source of new political forms. Although 
this does not appear in the twelfth century, the Italian cities, before long, developed a non- 
clerical culture which reached the very highest levels in literature, in art, and in science. All this 
was rendered possible by their successful resistance to Barbarossa. 

All the great cities of Northern Italy lived by trade, and in the twelfth century the more settled 
conditions made traders more prosperous than before. The maritime cities, Venice, Genoa, and 
Pisa, never had to fight for their liberty, and were therefore less hostile to the Emperor than the 
cities at the foot of the Alps, which were important to him as the gateways to Italy. It is for this 
reason that Milan is the most interesting and important of Italian cities at this time. 

Until the time of Henry III, the Milanese had usually been content to follow their archbishop. 

But the Patarine movement, mentioned in an earlier chapter, changed this: the archbishop sided 
with the nobility, while a powerful popular movement opposed him and 


* There was an antipope throughout most of this time. At the death of Hadrian IV, the two 
claimants, Alexander III and Victor IV, had a tug-ofwar for the papal mantle. Victor IV 
(who was the antipope), having failed to snatch the mantle, obtained from his partisans a 
substitute which he had had prepared, but in his haste he put it on inside-out. 


- 433 - 


them. Some beginnings of democracy resulted, and a constitution arose under which the rulers of 
the city were elected by the citizens. In various northern cities, but especially in Bologna, there 
was a learned class of lay lawyers, well versed in Roman law; moreover the rich laity, from the 
twelfth century onwards, were much better educated than the feudal nobility north of the Alps. 
Although they sided with the Pope against the Emperor, the rich commercial cities were not 
ecclesiastical in their outlook. In the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, many of them adopted 
heresies of a Puritan sort, like the merchants of England and Holland after the Reformation. Later, 
they tended to be free-thinkers, paying lip-service to the Church, but destitute of all real piety. 
Dante is the last of the old type, Boccaccio the first of the new. 

THE CRUSADES 

The Crusades need not concern us as wars, but they have a certain importance in relation to 
culture. It was natural for the papacy to take the lead in the initiating of a Crusade, since the object 
was (at least ostensibly) religious; thus the power of the popes was increased by the war 
propaganda and by the religious zeal that was excited. Another important effect was the massacre 
of large numbers of Jews; those who were not massacred were often despoiled of their property 
and forcibly baptized. There were large-scale murders of Jews in Germany at the time of the first 
Crusade, and in England, at the time of the third Crusade, on the accession of Richard CA“ur de 
Lion. York, where the first Christian Emperor had begun his reign, was, aptly enough, the scene of 
one of the most appalling mass-atrocities against Jews. The Jews, before the Crusades, had almost 
a monopoly of the trade in Eastern goods throughout Europe; after the Crusades, as a result of the 
persecution of Jews, this trade was largely in Christian hands. 

Another and very different effect of the Crusades was to stimulate literary intercourse with 
Constantinople. During the twelfth and early thirteenth centuries, many translations from Greek 
into Latin were made as a result of this intercourse. There had always been much trade with 
Constantinople, especially by Venetians; but Italia 


- 434 - 



traders did not trouble themselves with Greek classics, any more than English or American traders 
in Shanghai troubled themselves with the classics of China. (European knowledge of Chinese 
classics was derived mainly from missionaries.) 

THE GROWTH OF SCHOLASTICISM 

Scholasticism, in its narrower sense, begins early in the twelfth century. As a philosophic school, 
it has certain definite characteristics. First, it is confined within the limits of what appears to the 
writer to be orthodoxy; if his views are condemned by a council, he is usually willing to retract. 
This is not to be attributed entirely to cowardice; it is analogous to the submission of a judge to 
the decision of a Court of Appeal. Second, within the limits of orthodoxy, Aristotle, who 
gradually became more fully known during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, is increasingly 
accepted as the supreme authority; Plato no longer holds the first place. Third, there is a great 
belief in "dialectic" and in syllogistic reasoning; the general temper of the scholastics is minute 
and disputatious rather than mystical. Fourth, the question of universals is brought to the fore by 
the discovery that Aristotle and Plato do not agree about it; it would be a mistake to suppose, 
however, that universals are the main concern of the philosophers of this period. 

The twelfth century, in this as in other matters, prepares the way for the thirteenth, to which the 
greatest names belong. The earlier men have, however, the interest of pioneers. There is a new 
intellectual confidence, and, in spite of the respect for Aristotle, a free and vigorous exercise of 
reason wherever dogma has not made speculation too dangerous. The defects of the scholastic 
method are those that inevitably result from laying stress on "dialectic." These defects are: 
indifference to facts and science, belief in reasoning in matters which only observation can decide, 
and an undue emphasis on verbal distinctions and subtleties. These defects we had occasion to 
mention in connection with Plato, but in the scholastics they exist in a much more extreme form. 

The first philosopher who can be regarded as strictly a scholastic is Roscelin. Not very much is 
known about him. He was born at 


- 435 - 



CompiA'gne about 1050, and taught at Loches, in Brittany, where AbAOlard was his pupil. He 
was accused of heresy at a council at Rheims in 1092, and recanted for fear of being stoned to 
death by ecclesiastics with a taste for lynching. He fled to England, but there he was rash enough 
to attack Saint Anselm. This time he fled to Rome, where he was reconciled to the Church. He 
disappears from history about 1 120; the date of his death is purely conjectural. 

Nothing remains of Roscelin's writings except a letter to AbAOlard on the Trinity. In this letter he 
belittles AbAOlard and makes merry over his castration. Ueberweg, who seldom displays 
emotion, is led to observe that he can’t have been a very nice man. Apart from this letter, 
Roscelin's views are chiefly known through the controversial writings of Anselm and AbAOlard. 
According to Anselm, he said that universals are mere flatus vocis, "breath of the voice." If this is 
to be taken literally, it means that a universal is a physical occurrence, that, namely, which takes 
place when we pronounce a word. It is hardly to be supposed, however, that Roscelin maintained 
anything so foolish. Anselm says that, according to Roscelin, man is not a unity, but only a 
common name; this view Anselm, like a good Platonist, attributes to Roscelin’s only conceding 
reality to what is sensible. He seems to have held, generally, that a whole which has parts has no 
reality of its own, but is a mere word; the reality is in the parts. This view should have led him, 
and perhaps did lead him, to an extreme atomism. In any case, it led him into trouble about the 
Trinity. He considered that the Three Persons are three distinct substances, and that only usage 
stands in the way of our saying that there are Three Gods. The alternative, which he does not 
accept, is, according to him, to say that not only the Son, but the Father and the Holy Ghost, were 
incarnate. All this speculation, in so far as it was heretical, he recanted at Rheims in 1092. It is 
impossible to know exactly what he thought about universals, but at any rate it is plain that he was 
some sort of nominalist. 

His pupil AbA©lard (or Abailard) was much abler and much more distinguished. He was bom 
near Nantes in 1079, was a pupil of William of Champeaux (a realist) in Paris, and then a teacher 
in the Paris cathedral school, where he combated William's views and compelled him to modify 
them. After a period devoted to the study of theology under Anselm of Laon (not the archbishop), 
he returned 


- 436 - 



to Paris in 1113, and acquired extraordinary popularity as a teacher. It was at this time that he 
became the lover of HA©loA se, niece of Canon Fulbert. The canon had him castrated, and he 
and HA©loA se had to retire from the world, he into a monastery at St. Denis, she into a nunnery 
at Argenteuil. Their famous correspondence is said, by a learned German named Schmeidler, to 
have been entirely composed by AbA©lard as a literary fiction. I am not competent to judge as to 
the correctness of this theory, but nothing in AbA©lard’s character makes it impossible. He was 
always vain, disputatious, and contemptuous; after his misfortune he was also angry and 
humiliated. HA©loA se's letters are much more devoted than his, and one can imagine him 
composing them as a balm to his wounded pride. 

Even in his retirement, he still had great success as a teacher; the young liked his cleverness, his 
dialectical skill, and his irreverence towards their other teachers. Older men felt the correlative 
dislike of him, and in 1121 he was condemned at Soissons for an unorthodox book on the Trinity. 
Having made due submission, he became abbot of Saint Gildas in Brittany, where he found the 
monks savage boors. After four miserable years in this exile, he returned to comparative 
civilization. His further history is obscure, except that he continued to teach with great success, 
according to the testimony of John of Salisbury. In 1 141, at the instance of Saint Bernard, he was 
again condemned, this time at Sens. He retired to Cluny, and died the next year. 

AbA©lard's most famous book, composed in 1 121-22, is Sic et Non, "Yes and No. "Here he gives 
dialectical arguments for and against a great variety of theses, often without attempting to arrive at 
a conclusion; clearly he likes the disputation itself, and considers it useful as sharpening the wits. 
The book had a considerable effect in waking people from their dogmatic slumbers. AbA©lard's 
view, that (apart from Scripture) dialectic is the sole road to truth, while no empiricist can accept 
it, had, at the time, a valuable effect as a solvent of prejudices and an encouragement to the 
fearless use of the intellect. Nothing outside the Scriptures, he said, is infallible; even Apostles 
and Fathers may err. 

His valuation of logic was, from a modern point of view, excessive. He considered it pre- 
eminently the Christian science, and made play with its derivation from "Logos." "In the 
beginning was the Logos," 


- 437 - 



says Saint John’s Gospel, and this, he thought, proves the dignity of Logic. 

His chief importance is in logic and theory of knowledge. His philosophy is a critical analysis, 
largely linguistic. As for universals, i. e., what can be predicated of many different things, he 
holds that we do not predicate a thing, but a word. In this sense he is a nominalist. But as 
against Roscelin he points out that a "flatus vocis" is a thing; it is not the word as a physical 
occurrence that we predicate, but the word as meaning. Here he appeals to Aristotle. Things, he 
says, resemble each other, and these resemblances give rise to universals. But the point of 
resemblance between two similar things is not itself a thing; this is the mistake of realism. He 
says some things that are even more hostile to realism, for example, that general concepts are 
not based in the nature of things, but are confused images of many things. Nevertheless he does 
not wholly refuse a place to Platonic ideas: they exist in the divine mind as patterns for creation; 
they are, in fact, God's concepts. 

All this, whether right or wrong, is certainly very able. The most modern discussions of the 
problem of universals have not got much further. 

Saint Bernard, whose saintliness did not suffice to make him intelligent, ^failed to understand 
AbA©lard, and brought unjust accusations against him. He asserted that AbA©lard treats the 
Trinity like an Arian, grace like a Pelagian, and the Person of Christ like a Nestorian; that he 
proves himself a heathen in sweating to prove Plato a Christian; and further, that he destroys the 
merit of the Christian faith by maintaining that God can be completely understood by human 
reason. In fact, AbA©lard never maintained this last, and always left a large province to faith, 
although, like Saint Anselm, he thought that the Trinity could be rationally demonstrated 
without the help of revelation. It is true that, at one time, he identified the Holy Ghost with the 
Platonic Soul of the World, but he abandoned this view as soon as its heretical character was 
pointed out to him. Probably it was more his combativeness than his doctrines that caused him 
to be accused of heresy, for his habit of criticizing pundits made him violently unpopular with 
all influential persons. 


* "The greatness of St. Bernard lay not in the qualities of his intellect, but of his character."— 
EncyclopA\dia Britannica. 


- 438 - 


Most of the learned men of the time were less devoted to dialectic than AbA©lard was. There 
was, especially in the School of Chartres, a humanistic movement, which admired antiquity, 
and followed Plato and Boethius. There was a renewed interest in mathematics: Adelard of Bath 
went to Spain early in the twelfth century, and in consequence translated Euclid. 

As opposed to the dry scholastic method, there was a strong mystical movement, of which Saint 
Bernard was the leader. His father was a knight who died in the first Crusade. He himself was a 
Cistercian monk, and in 1115 became abbot of the newly-founded abbey of Clairvaux. He was 
very influential in ecclesiastical politics— turning the scales against antipopes, combating heresy 
in Northern Italy and Southern France, bringing the weight of orthodoxy to bear on adventurous 
philosophers, and preaching the second Crusade. In attacking philosophers he was usually 
successful; but after the collapse of his Crusade he failed to secure the conviction of Gilbert de 
la PorrA©e, who agreed with Boethius more than seemed right to the saintly heresy-hunter. 
Although a politician and a bigot, he was a man of genuinely religious temperament, and his 
Latin hymns have great beauty. ^_Among those influenced by him, mysticism became 
increasingly dominant, till it passed into something like heresy in Joachim of Flora (d. 1202). 
The influence of this man, however, belongs to a later time. Saint Bernard and his followers 
sought religious truth, not in reasoning, but in subjective experience and contemplation. 
AbA©lard and Bernard are perhaps equally one-sided. 

Bernard, as a religious mystic, deplored the absorption of the papacy in worldly concerns, and 
disliked the temporal power. Although he preached the Crusade, he did not seem to understand 
that a war requires organization, and cannot be conducted by religious enthusiasm alone. He 
complains that "the law of Justinian, not the law of the Lord" absorbs men's attention. He is 
shocked when the Pope defends his domain by military force. The function of the Pope is 
spiritual, and he should not attempt actual government. This point of view, however, is 
combined with unbounded reverence for the Pope, whom he calls "prince of bishops, heir of the 
apostles, of the 


* Medieval Latin hymns, rhymed and accentual, give expression, sometimes sublime, 
sometimes gentle and pathetic, to the best side of the religious feeling of the times. 


- 439 - 


primacy of Abel, the governance of Noah, the patriarchate of Abraham, the order of Melchizedek, 
the dignity of Aaron, the authority of Moses, in judgeship Samuel, in power Peter, in unction 
Christ." The net result of Saint Bernard’s activities was, of course, a great increase of the power of 
the Pope in secular affairs. 

John of Salisbury, though not an important thinker, is valuable for our knowledge of his times, of 
which he wrote a gossipy account. He was secretary to three archbishops of Canterbury, one of 
whom was Becket; he was a friend of Hadrian IV; at the end of his life he was bishop of Chartres, 
where he died in 1180. In matters outside the faith, he was a man of sceptical temper; he called 
himself an Academic (in the sense in which Saint Augustine uses this tenn). His respect for kings 
was limited: "an illiterate king is a crowned ass." He revered Saint Bernard, but was well aware 
that his attempt to reconcile Plato and Aristotle must be a failure. He admired AbeA©lard, but 
laughed at his theory of universals, and at Roscelin’s equally. He thought logic a good introduction 
to learning, but in itself bloodless and sterile. Aristotle, he says, can be improved on, even in 
logic; respect for ancient authors should not hamper the critical exercise of reason. Plato is still to 
him the "prince of all philosophers." He knows personally most of the learned men of his time, 
and takes a friendly part in scholastic debates. On revisiting one school of philosophy after thirty 
years, he smiles to find them still discussing the same problems. The atmosphere of the society 
that he frequents is very like that of Oxford Common Rooms thirty years ago. Towards the end of 
his life, the cathedral schools gave place to universities, and universities, at least in England, have 
had a remarkable continuity from that day to this. 

During the twelfth century, translators gradually increased the number of Greek books available to 
Western students. There were three main sources of such translations: Constantinople, Palenno, 
and Toledo. Of these Toledo was the most important, but the translations coming from there were 
often from the Arabic, not direct from the Greek. In the second quarter of the twelfth century, 
Archbishop Raymond of Toledo instituted a college of translators, whose work was very fruitful. 
In 1 128, James of Venice translated Aristotle Analytics, Topics, and Sophistici Elenchi; the 
Posterior Analytics were found difficult by Western philosophers. Henry Aristippus of 


- 440 - 



Catania (d. 1 162) translated the Phaedo and Meno, but his translations had no immediate effect. 
Partial as was the knowledge of Greek philosophy in the twelfth century, learned men were aware 
that much of it remained to be discovered by the West, and a certain eagerness arose to acquire a 
fuller knowledge of antiquity. The yoke of orthodoxy was not so severe as is sometimes supposed; 
a man could always write his book, and then, if necessary, withdraw its heretical portions after full 
public discussion. Most of the philosophers of the time were French, and France was important to 
the Church as a makeweight against the Empire. Whatever theological heresies might occur 
among them, learned clerics were almost all politically orthodox; this made the peculiar 
wickedness of Arnold of Brescia, who was an exception to the rule. The whole of early 
scholasticism may be viewed, politically, as an offshoot of the Church's struggle for power. 

CHAPTER XII The Thirteenth Century 

IN the thirteenth century the Middle Ages reached a culmination. The synthesis which had been 
gradually built up since the fall of Rome became as complete as it was capable of being. The 
fourteenth century brought a dissolution of institutions and philosophies; the fifteenth brought the 
beginning of those that we still regard as modern. The great men of the thirteenth century were 
very great: Innocent III, Saint Francis, Frederick II, and Thomas Aquinas are, in their different 
ways, supreme representatives of their respective types. There were also great achievements not so 
definitely associated with great names: the Gothic cathedrals of France, the romantic literature of 
Charlemagne, Arthur, and the Niebelungen, the beginnings of constitutional government in Magna 
Carta and the House of Commons. The matter that concerns us most directly is the scholastic 
philosophy, especially as set forth by Aquinas; but I shall leave this for the next chapter, and 
attempt, first, to give an 

-441- 



outline of the events that did most to fonn the mental atmosphere of the age. 

The central figure at the beginning of the century is Pope Innocent III ( 1 198-1216), a shrewd 
politician, a man of infinite vigour, a firm believer in the most extreme claims of the papacy, but 
not endowed with Christian humility. At his consecration, he preached from the text: "See, I have 
this day set thee over the nations and over the kingdoms, to pluck up and to break down, to 
destroy and to overthrow, to build and to plant." He called himself "king of kings, lord of lords, a 
priest for ever and ever according to the order of Melchizedek." In enforcing this view of himself, 
he took advantage of every favourable circumstance. In Sicily, which had been conquered by the 
Emperor Henry VI (d. 1 197), who had married Constance, heiress of the Norman kings, the new 
king was Frederick, only three years old at the time of Innocent's accession. The kingdom was 
turbulent, and Constance needed the Pope's help. She made him guardian of the infant Frederick, 
and secured his recognition of her son's rights in Sicily by acknowledging papal superiority. 
Portugal and Aragon made similar acknowledgements. In England, King John, after vehement 
resistance, was compelled to yield his kingdom to Innocent and receive it back as a papal fief. 

To some degree, the Venetians got the better of him in the matter of the fourth Crusade. The 
soldiers of the Cross were to embark at Venice, but there were difficulties in procuring enough 
ships. No one had enough except the Venetians, and they maintained (for purely commercial 
reasons) that it would be much better to conquer Constantinople than Jerusalem— in any case, it 
would be a useful stepping-stone, and the Eastern Empire had never been very friendly to 
Crusaders. It was found necessary to give way to Venice; Constantinople was captured, and a 
Latin Emperor established. At first Innocent was annoyed; but he reflected that it might now be 
possible to re-unite the Eastern and Western Churches. (This hope proved vain.) Except in this 
instance, I do not know of anybody who ever in any degree got the better of Innocent III. He 
ordered the great Crusade against the Albigenses, which rooted out heresy, happiness, prosperity, 
and culture from southern France. He deposed Raymond, Count of Toulouse, for lukewarmness 
about the Crusade, and secured most of the region of the Albigenses for its leader, Simon de 


- 442 - 



Montfort, father of the father of Parliament. He quarrelled with the Emperor Otto, and called upon 
the Germans to depose him. They did so, and at his suggestion elected Frederick II, now just of 
age, in his stead. But for his support of Frederick he exacted a terrific price in promises— which, 
however, Frederick was determined to break as soon as possible. 

Innocent III was the first great Pope in whom there was no element of sanctity. The reform of the 
Church made the hierarchy feel secure as to its moral prestige, and therefore convinced that it 
need no longer trouble to be holy. The power motive, from his time on, more and more 
exclusively dominated the papacy, and produced opposition from some religious men even in his 
day. He codified the canon law so as to increase the power of the Curia; Walther von der 
Vogelweide called this code "the blackest book that hell ever gave." Although the papacy still had 
resounding victories to win, the manner of its subsequent decline might already have been 
foreseen. 

Frederick II, who had been the ward of Innocent III, went to Germany in 1212, and by the Pope's 
help was elected to replace Otto. Innocent did not live to see what a fonnidable antagonist he had 
raised up against the papacy. 

Frederick— one of the most remarkable rulers known to history-had passed his childhood and 
youth in difficult and adverse circumstances. His father Henry VI (son of Barbarossa) had 
defeated the Normans of Sicily, and married Constance, heiress to the kingdom. He established a 
German garrison, which was hated by the Sicilians; but he died in 1 197, when Frederick was three 
years old. Constance thereupon turned against the Germans, and tried to govern without them by 
the help of the Pope. The Germans were resentful, and Otto tried to conquer Sicily; this was the 
cause of his quarrel with the Pope. Palermo, where Frederick passed his childhood, was subject to 
other troubles. There were Muslim revolts; the Pisans and Genoese fought each other and every 
one else for possession of the island; the important people in Sicily were constantly changing 
sides, according as one party or the other offered the higher price for treachery. Culturally, 
however, Sicily had great advantages. Muslim, Byzantine, Italian, and, German civilization met 
and mingled there as nowhere else. Greek and Arabic were still living languages in Sicily. 
Frederick leamt to speak six languages fluently, and in all six 


- 443 - 



he was witty. He was at home in Arabian philosophy, and had friendly relations with 
Mohammedans, which scandalized pious Christians. He was a Hohenstaufen, and in Gennany 
could count as a German. But in culture and sentiment he was Italian, with a tincture of Byzantine 
and Arab. His contemporaries gazed upon him with astonishment gradually turning into horror; 
they called him "wonder of the world and marvellous innovator." While still alive, he was the 
subject of myths. He was said to be the author of a book De Tribus Impostoribus — the three 
impostors were Moses, Christ, and Mahomet. This book, which never existed, was attributed, 
successively, to many enemies of the Church, the last of whom was Spinoza. 

The words "Guelf' and "Ghibelline" began to be used at the time of Frederick's contest with the 
Emperor Otto. They are corruptions of "Welf" and "Waiblingen," the family names of the two 
contestants. ( Otto's nephew was an ancestor of the British royal family.) 

Innocent III died in 1216; Otto, whom Frederick had defeated, died in 1218. The new Pope, 
Honorius III, was at first on good terms with Frederick, but difficulties soon arose. First, Frederick 
refused to go on Crusade; then he had trouble with the Lombard cities, which in 1226 contracted 
an offensive and defensive alliance for twentyfive years. They hated the Gennans; one of their 
poets wrote fiery verses against them: "Love not the folk of Germany; far, far from you be these 
mad dogs." This seems to have expressed the general feeling in Lombardy. Frederick wanted to 
remain in Italy to deal with the cities, but in 1227 Honorius died, and was succeeded by Gregory 
IX, a fiery ascetic who loved Saint Francis and was beloved by him. (He canonized Saint Francis 
two years after his death.) Gregory thought nothing else so important as the Crusade, and 
excommunicated Frederick for not undertaking it. Frederick, who had married the daughter and 
heiress of the King of Jerusalem, was willing enough to go when he could, and called himself 
King of Jerusalem. In 1228, while still excommunicate, he went; this made Gregory even more 
angry than his previously not going, for how could the crusading host be led by a man whom the 
Pope had banned? Arrived in Palestine, Frederick made friends with the Mohammedans, 
explained to them that the Christians attached importance to Jerusalem although it was of little 
strategic value, and succeeded in inducing them peaceably to restore the city to him. This made 
the Pope 


- 444 - 



still more furious— one should fight the infidel, not negotiate with him. However, Frederick was 
duly crowned in Jerusalem, and no one could deny that he had been successful. Peace between 
Pope and Emperor was restored in 1230. 

During the few years of peace that followed, the Emperor devoted himself to the affairs of the 
kingdom of Sicily. By the help of his prime minister, Pietro dera Vigna, he promulgated a new 
legal code, derived from Roman law, and showing a high level of civilization in his southern 
dominion; the code was at once translated into Greek, for the benefit of the Greek-speaking 
inhabitants. He founded an important university at Naples. He minted gold coins, called 
"augustals," the first gold coins in the West for many centuries. He established freer trade, and 
abolished all internal customs. He even summoned elected representatives of the cities to his 
council, which, however, had only consultative powers. 

This period of peace ended when Frederick again came into conflict with the Lombard League in 
1237; the Pope threw in his lot with them, and again excommunicated the Emperor. From this 
time until Frederick's death in 1250, the war was practically continuous, growing, on both sides, 
gradually more bitter, cruel, and treacherous. There were great fluctuations of fortune, and the 
issue was still undecided when the Emperor died. But those who attempted to be his successors 
had not his power, and were gradually defeated, leaving Italy divided and the Pope victorious. 

Deaths of popes made little difference in the struggle; each new pope took up his predecessor's 
policy practically unchanged. Gregory IX died in 1241; in 1243 Innocent IV, a bitter enemy of 
Frederick, was elected. Louis IX, in spite of his impeccable orthodoxy, tried to moderate the fury 
of Gregory and Innocent IV, but in vain. Innocent, especially, rejected all overtures from the 
Emperor, and used all manner of unscrupulous expedients against him. He pronounced him 
deposed, declared a crusade against him, and excommunicated all who supported him. The friars 
preached against him, the Muslims rose, there were plots among his prominent nominal 
supporters. All this made Frederick increasingly cruel; plotters were ferociously punished, and 
prisoners were deprived of the right eye and the right hand. 

At one time during this titanic struggle, Frederick thought of founding a new religion, in which he 
was to be the Messiah, and his 


- 445 - 



minister Pietro della Vigna was to take the place of Saint Peter. ^_He did not get so far as to 
make this project public, but wrote about it to della Vigna. Suddenly, however, he became 
convinced, rightly or wrongly, that Pietro was plotting against him; he blinded him, and 
exhibited him publicly in a cage; Pietro, however, avoided further suffering by suicide. 

Frederick, in spite of his abilities, could not have succeeded, because the antipapal forces that 
existed in his time were pious and democratic, whereas his aim was something like a restoration 
of the pagan Roman Empire. In culture he was enlightened, but politically he was retrograde. 

His court was oriental; he had a harem with eunuchs. But it was in this court that Italian poetry 
began; he himself had some merit as a poet. In his conflict with the papacy, he published 
controversial statements as to the dangers of ecclesiastical absolutism, which would have been 
applauded in the sixteenth century, but fell flat in his own day. The heretics, who should have 
been his allies, appeared to him simply rebels, and to please the Pope he persecuted them. The 
free cities, but for the Emperor, might have opposed the Pope; but so long as Frederick 
demanded their submission they welcomed the Pope as an ally. Thus, although he was free from 
the superstitions of his age, and in culture far above other contemporary rulers, his position as 
Emperor compelled him to oppose all that was politically liberal. He failed inevitably, but of all 
the failures in history he remains one of the most interesting. 

The heretics, against whom Innocent III crusaded, and whom all rulers (including Frederick) 
persecuted, deserve study, both in themselves and as giving a glimpse of popular feeling, of 
which, otherwise, hardly a hint appears in the writings of the time. 

The most interesting, and also the largest, of the heretical sects were the Cathari, who, in the 
South of France, are better known as Albigenses. Their doctrines came from Asia by way of the 
Balkans; they were widely held in Northern Italy, and in the South of France they were held by 
the great majority, including nobles, who liked the excuse to seize Church lands. The cause of 
this wide diffusion of heresy was partly disappointment at the failure of the Crusades, but 
mainly moral disgust at the wealth and wickedness of the clergy. 


* See the life of Frederick II, by Hermann Kantorowicz. 


- 446 - 


There was a wide-spread feeling, analogous to later puritanism, in favour of personal holiness; 
this was associated with a cult of poverty. The Church was rich and largely worldly; very many 
priests were grossly immoral. The friars brought accusations against the older orders and the 
parish priests, asserting abuse of the confessional for purposes of seduction; and the enemies of 
the friars retorted the accusation. There can be no doubt that such charges were largely justified. 
The more the Church claimed supremacy on religious grounds, the more plain people were 
shocked by the contrast between profession and perfonnance. The same motives which ultimately 
led to the Reformation were operative in the thirteenth century. The main difference was that 
secular rulers were not ready to throw in their lot with the heretics; and this was largely because 
no existing philosophy could reconcile heresy with the claims of kings to dominion. 

The tenets of the Cathari cannot be known with certainty, as we are entirely dependent on the 
testimony of their enemies. Moreover ecclesiastics, being well versed in the history of heresy, 
tended to apply some familiar label, and to attribute to existing sects all the tenets of fonner ones, 
often on the basis of some not very close resemblance. Nevertheless, there is a good deal that is 
almost beyond question. It seems that the Cathari were dualists, and that, like the Gnostics, they 
considered the Old Testament Jehovah a wicked demiurge, the true God being only revealed in the 
New Testament. They regarded matter as essentially evil, and believed that for the virtuous there 
is no resurrection of the body. The wicked, however, will suffer transmigration into the bodies of 
animals. On this ground they were vegetarians, abstaining even from eggs, cheese, and milk. They 
ate fish, however, because they believed that fishes are not sexually generated. All sex was 
abhorrent to them; marriage, some said, is even worse than adultery, because it is continuous and 
complacent. On the other hand, they saw no objection to suicide. They accepted the New 
Testament more literally than did the orthodox; they abstained from oaths, and turned the other 
cheek. The persecutors record a case of a man accused of heresy, who defended himself by saying 
that he ate meat, lied, swore, and was a good Catholic. 

The stricter precepts of the sect were only to be observed by certain exceptionally holy people 
called the "perfected"; the others might eat meat and even marry. 


- 447 - 



It is interesting to trace the genealogy of these doctrines. They came to Italy and France, by way of 
the Crusaders, from a sect called the Bogomiles in Bulgaria; in 1 167, when the Cathari held a 
council near Toulouse, Bulgarian delegates attended. The Bogomiles, in turn, were the result of a 
fusion of ManichAjans and Paulicians. The Paulicians were an Armenian sect who rejected infant 
baptism, purgatory, the invocation of saints, and the Trinity; they spread gradually into Thrace, 
and thence into Bulgaria. The Paulicians were followers of Marcion (ca. A.D. 150), who 
considered himself to be following Saint Paul in rejecting the Jewish elements in Christianity, and 
who had some affinity with the Gnostics without being one of them. 

The only other popular heresy that I shall consider is that of the Waldenses. These were the 
followers of Peter Waldo, an enthusiast who, in 1 170, started a "crusade" for observance of the 
law of Christ. He gave all his goods to the poor, and founded a society called the "Poor Men of 
Lyons," who practised poverty and a strictly virtuous life. At first they had papal approval, but 
they inveighed somewhat too forcibly against the immorality of the clergy, and were condemned 
by the Council of Verona in 1184. Thereupon they decided that every good man is competent to 
preach and expound the Scriptures; they appointed their own ministers, and dispensed with the 
services of the Catholic priesthood. They spread to Lombardy, and to Bohemia, where they paved 
the way for the Hussites. In the Albigensian persecution, which affected them also, many fled to 
Piedmont; it was their persecution in Piedmont in Milton’s time that occasioned his sonnet 
"Avenge, O Lord, thy slaughtered saints." They survive to this day in remote Alpine valleys and in 
the United States. 

All this heresy alarmed the Church, and vigorous measures were taken to suppress it. Innocent III 
considered that heretics deserved death, being guilty of treason to Christ. He called upon the King 
of France to embark upon a Crusade against the Albigenses, which was done in 1209. It was 
conducted with incredible ferocity; after the taking of Carcassonne, especially, there was an 
appalling massacre. The ferreting out of heresy had been the business of the bishops, but it 
became too onerous to be performed by men who had other duties, and in 1233 Gregory IX 
founded the Inquisition, to take over this part of the work of the episcopate. After 1254, those 
accused by the Inquisition were not allowed counsel. If condemned, their property 


- 448 - 



was confiscated— in France, to the crown. When an accused person was found guilty, he was 
handed over to the secular ann with a prayer that his life might be spared; but if the secular 
authorities failed to bum him, they were liable to be themselves brought before the Inquisition. It 
dealt not only with heresy in the ordinary sense, but with sorcery and witchcraft. In Spain, it was 
mainly directed against crypto-Jews. Its work was performed mainly by Dominicans and 
Franciscans. It never penetrated to Scandinavia or England, but the English were quite ready to 
make use of it against Joan of Arc. On the whole, it was very successful; at the outset, it 
completely stamped out the Albigensian heresy. 

The Church, in the early thirteenth century, was in danger of a revolt scarcely less formidable than 
that of the sixteenth. From this it was saved, very largely, by the rise of the mendicant orders; 

Saint Francis and Saint Dominic did much more for orthodoxy than was done by even the most 
vigorous popes. 

Saint Francis of Assisi ( 1181 or 1182-1226) was one of the most lovable men known to history. 
He was of a well-to-do family, and in his youth was not averse to ordinary gaieties. But one day, 
as he was riding by a leper, a sudden impulse of pity led him to dismount and kiss the man. Soon 
afterwards, he decided to forgo all worldly goods, and devote his life to preaching and good 
works. His father, a respectable business man, was furious, but could not deter him. He soon 
gathered a band of followers, all vowed to complete poverty. At first, the Church viewed the 
movement with some suspicion; it seemed too like the "Poor Men of Lyons." The first 
missionaries whom Saint Francis sent to distant places were taken for heretics, because they 
practised poverty instead of (like the monks) only taking a vow which no one regarded as serious. 
But Innocent III was shrewd enough to see the value of the movement, if it could be kept within 
the bounds of orthodoxy, and in 1209 or 1210 he gave recognition to the new order. Gregory IX, 
who was a personal friend of Saint Francis, continued to favour him, while imposing certain rules 
which were irksome to the saint's enthusiastic and anarchic impulses. Francis wished to interpret 
the vow of poverty in the strictest possible way; he objected to houses or churches for his 
followers. They were to beg their bread, and to have no lodging but what chance hospitality 
provided. In 1219, he travelled to the East and preached 


- 449 - 



before the sultan, who received him courteously but remained a Mohammedan. On his return, he 
found that the Franciscans had built themselves a house; he was deeply pained, but the Pope 
induced or compelled him to give way. After his death, Gregory canonized him but softened his 
rule in the article of poverty. 

In the matter of saintliness, Francis has had equals; what makes him unique among saints is his 
spontaneous happiness, his universal love, and his gifts as a poet. His goodness appears always 
devoid of effort, as though it had no dross to overcome. He loved all living things, not only as a 
Christian or a benevolent man, but as a poet. His hymn to the sun, written shortly before his death, 
might almost have been written by Akhnaton the sun-worshipper, but not quite-Christianity 
informs it, though not very obviously. He felt a duty to lepers, for their sake, not for his; unlike 
most Christian saints, he was more interested in the happiness of others than in his own salvation. 
He never showed any feeling of superiority, even to the humblest or most wicked. Thomas of 
Celano said of him that he was more than a saint among saints; among sinners he was one of 
themselves. 

If Satan existed, the future of the order founded by Saint Francis would afford him the most 
exquisite gratification. The saint's immediate successor as head of the order, Brother Elias, 
wallowed in luxury, and allowed a complete abandonment of poverty. The chief work of the 
Franciscans in the years immediately following the death of their founder was as recruiting 
sergeants in the bitter and bloody wars of Guelfs and Ghibellines. The Inquisition, founded seven 
years after his death, was, in several countries, chiefly conducted by Franciscans. A small 
minority, called the Spirituals, remained true to his teaching; many of these were burnt by the 
Inquisition for heresy. These men held that Christ and the Apostles owned no property, not even 
the clothes they wore; this opinion was condemned as heretical in 1323 by John XXII. The net 
result of Saint Francis's life was to create yet one more wealthy and corrupt order, to strengthen 
the hierarchy, and to facilitate the persecution of all who excelled in moral earnestness or freedom 
of thought. In view of his own aims and character, it is impossible to imagine any more bitterly 
ironical outcome. 

Saint Dominic ( 1 170-1221) is much less interesting than Saint Francis. He was a Castilian, and 
had, like Loyola, a fanatical devotion to orthodoxy. His main purpose was to combat heresy, and 
he adopted 


- 450 - 



poverty as a means to this end. He was present throughout the Albigensian war, though he is said 
to have deplored some of its more extreme atrocities. The Dominican Order was founded in 1215 
by Innocent III, and won quick success. The only human trait known to me in Saint Dominic is his 
confession to Jordan of Saxony that he liked talking to young women better than to old ones. In 
1242, the order solemnly decreed that this passage should be deleted from Jordan's life of the 
founder. 

The Dominicans were even more active than the Franciscans in the work of the Inquisition. They 
performed, however, a valuable service to mankind by their devotion to learning. This was no part 
of Saint Dominic's intention; he had decreed that his friars were "not to learn secular sciences or 
liberal arts except by dispensation." This rule was abrogated in 1259, after which date everything 
was done to make a studious life easy for Dominicans. Manual labour was no part of their duties, 
and the hours of devotion were shortened to give them more time for study. They devoted 
themselves to reconciling Aristotle and Christ; Alberrus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas, both 
Dominicans, accomplished this task as well as it is capable of being accomplished. The authority 
of Thomas Aquinas was so overwhelming that subsequent Dominicans did not achieve much in 
philosophy; though Francis, even more than Dominic, had disliked learning, the greatest names in 
the immediately following period are Franciscan: Roger Bacon, Duns Scotus, and William of 
Occam were all Franciscans. What the friars accomplished for philosophy will be the subject of 
the following chapters. 


-451- 

CHAPTER XIII Saint Thomas Aquinas 

THOMAS AQUINAS (b. 1225 or 1226, d. 1274) is regarded as the greatest of scholastic 
philosophers. In all Catholic educational institutions that teach philosophy his system has to be 
taught as the only right one; this has been the rule since a rescript of 1879 by Leo XIII. Saint 
Thomas, therefore, is not only of historical interest, but is a living influence, like Plato, 

Aristotle, Kant, and Hegel —more, in fact, than the latter two. In most respects, he follows 
Aristotle so closely that the Stagyrite has, among Catholics, almost the authority of one of the 
Fathers; to criticize him in matters of pure philosophy has come to be thought almost impious. * 
This was not always the case. In the time of Aquinas, the battle for Aristotle, as against Plato, 
still had to be fought. The influence of Aquinas secured the victory until the Renaissance; then 
Plato, who became better known than in the Middle Ages, again acquired supremacy in the 
opinion of most philosophers. In the seventeenth century, it was possible to be orthodox and a 
Cartesian; Malebranche, though a priest, was never censured. But in our day such freedoms are 
a thing of the past; Catholic ecclesiastics must accept Saint Thomas if they concern themselves 
with philosophy. 

Saint Thomas was the son of the Count of Aquino, whose castle, in the kingdom of Naples, was 
close to Monte Cassino, where the education of the "angelic doctor" began. He was for six years 
at Frederick II's university of Naples; then he became a Dominican, and went to Cologne, to 
study under Albertus Magnus, who was the leading Aristotelian among the philosophers of the 
time. After a period in Cologne and Paris, he returned to Italy in 1259, where he spent the rest 
of his life except for the three years 1269-72. During these three years he was in Paris, where 
the Dominicans, on account of their Aristotelian- 


* When I did so in a broadcast, very many protests from Catholics resulted. 


- 452 - 


ism, were in trouble with the university authorities, and were suspected of heretical sympathy with 
the Averroists, who had a powerful party in the university. The Averroists held, on the basis of 
their interpretation of Aristotle, that the soul, in so far as it is individual, is not immortal; 
immortality belongs only to the intellect, which is impersonal, and identical in different 
intellectual beings. When it was forcibly brought to their notice that this doctrine is contrary to the 
Catholic faith, they took refuge in the subterfuge of "double truth": one sort, based on reason, in 
philosophy, and another, based on revelation, in theology. All this brought Aristotle into bad 
odour, and Saint Thomas, in Paris, was concerned to undo the harm done by too close adherence 
to Arabian doctrines. In this he was singularly successful. 

Aquinas, unlike his predecessors, had a really competent knowledge of Aristotle. His friend 
William of Moerbeke provided him with translations from the Greek, and he himself wrote 
commentaries. Until his time, men’s notions of Aristotle had been obscured by Neoplatonic 
accretions. He, however, followed the genuine Aristotle, and disliked Platonism, even as it 
appears in Saint Augustine. He succeeded in persuading the Church that Aristotle's system was to 
be preferred to Plato's as the basis of Christian philosophy, and that Mohammedans and Christian 
Averroists had misinterpreted Aristotle. For my part, I should say that the De Anima leads much 
more naturally to the view of Averroes than to that of Aquinas; however, the Church, since Saint 
Thomas, has thought otherwise. I should say, further, that Aristotle's views on most questions of 
logic and philosophy were not final, and have since been proved to be largely erroneous; this 
opinion, also, is not allowed to be professed by any Catholic philosopher or teacher of philosophy. 

Saint Thomas's most important work, the Summa contra Gentiles, was written during the years 
1259-64. It is concerned to establish the truth of the Christian religion by arguments addressed to 
a reader supposed to be not already a Christian; one gathers that the imaginary reader is usually 
thought of as a man versed in the philosophy of the Arabs. He wrote another book, Summa 
Theologiae, of almost equal importance, but of somewhat less interest to us because less designed 
to use arguments not assuming in advance the truth of Christianity. 

What follows is an abstract of the Summa contra Gentiles. 


- 453 - 



Let us first consider what is meant by "wisdom." A man may be wise in some particular pursuit, 
such as making houses; this implies that he knows the means to some particular end. But all 
particular ends are subordinate to the end of the universe, and wisdom per se is concerned with 
the end of the universe. Now the end of the universe is the good of the intellect, i.e., truth. The 
pursuit of wisdom in this sense is the most perfect, sublime, profitable, and delightful of pursuits. 
All this is proved by appeal to the authority of "The Philosopher," i.e., Aristotle. 

My purpose (he says) is to declare the truth which the Catholic Faith professes. But here I must 
have recourse to natural reason, since the gentiles do not accept the authority of Scripture. Natural 
reason, however, is deficient in the things of God; it can prove some parts of the faith, but not 
others. It can prove the existence of God and the immortality of the soul, but not the Trinity, the 
Incarnation, or the Last Judgement. Whatever is demonstrable is, so far as it goes, in accordance 
with the Christian faith, and nothing in revelation is contrary to reason. But it is important to 
separate the parts of the faith which can be proved by reason from those which cannot. 
Accordingly, of the four books into which the Summa is divided, the first three make no appeal to 
revelation, except to show that it is in accordance with conclusions reached by reason; only in the 
fourth book are matters treated which cannot be known apart from revelation. 

The first step is to prove the existence of God. Some think this unnecessary, since the existence of 
God (they say) is self-evident. If we knew God's essence, this would be true, since (as is proved 
later) in God, essence and existence are one. But we do not know His essence, except very 
imperfectly. Wise men know more of his essence than do the ignorant, and angels know more than 
either; but no creature knows enough of it to be able to deduce God’s existence from His essence. 
On this ground, the ontological argument is rejected. 

It is important to remember that religious truth which can be proved can also be known by faith. 
The proofs are difficult, and can only be understood by the learned; but faith is necessary also to 
the ignorant, to the young, and to those who, from practical preoccupations, have not the leisure to 
leam philosophy. For them, revelation suffices. 

Some say that God is only knowable by faith. They argue that, if 


- 454 - 



the principles of demonstration became known to us through experience derived from the 
senses, as is said in the Posterior Analytics, whatever transcends sense cannot be proved. This, 
however, is false; and even if it were true, God could be known from His sensible effects. 

The existence of God is proved, as in Aristotle, by the argument of the unmoved mover. * 

There are things which are only moved, and other things which both move and are moved. 
Whatever is moved is moved by something, and, since an endless regress is impossible, we 
must arrive somewhere at something which moves without being moved. This unmoved mover 
is God. It might be objected that this argument involves the eternity of movement, which 
Catholics reject. This would be an error: it is valid on the hypothesis of the eternity of 
movement, but is only strengthened by the opposite hypothesis, which involves a beginning, 
and therefore a First Cause. 

In the Summa Theologiae, five proofs of God's existence are given. First, the argument of the 
unmoved mover, as above. Second, the argument of the. First Cause, which again depends upon 
the impossibility of an infinite regress. Third, that there must be an ultimate source of all 
necessity; this is much the same as the second argument. Fourth, that we find various 
perfections in the world, and that these must have their source in something completely perfect. 
Fifth, that we find even lifeless things serving a purpose, which must be that of some being 
outside them, since only living things can have an internal purpose. 

To return to the Summa contra Gentiles, having proved the existence of God, we can now say 
many things about Him, but these are all, in a sense, negative: God's nature is only known to us 
through what it is not. God is eternal, since He is unmoved; He is unchanging, since He 
contains no passive potentiality. David of Dinant (a materialistic pantheist of the early 
thirteenth century) "raved" that God is the same as primary matter; this is absurd, since primary 
matter is pure passivity, and God is pure activity. In God, there is no composition, therefore He 
is not a body, because bodies have parts. 

God is His own essence since otherwise He would not be simple, but would be compounded of 
essence and existence. (This point is 


* But in Aristotle the argument leads to 47 or 55 Gods. 


- 455 - 


important.) In God, essence and existence are identical. There are no accidents in God. He 
cannot be specified by any substantial difference; He is not in any genus; He cannot be defined. 
But He lacks not the excellence of any genus. Things are in some ways like God, in others not. 
It is more fitting to say that things are like God than that God is like things. 

God is good, and is His own goodness; He is the good of every good. He is intelligent, and His 
act of intelligence is His essence. He understands by His essence, and understands Himself 
perfectly. (John the Scot, it will be remembered, thought otherwise.) 

Although there is no composition in the divine intellect, God understands many things. This 
might seem a difficulty, but the things that He understands have no distinct being in Him. Nor 
do they exist per se, as Plato thought, because forms of natural things cannot exist or be 
understood apart from matter. Nevertheless, God must understand forms before creating. The 
solution of this difficulty is as follows: "The concept of the divine intellect, according as He 
understands Himself, which concept is His Word, is the likeness not only of God Himself 
understood, but also of all the things of which the divine essence is the likeness. Accordingly 
many things can be understood by God, by one intelligible species which is the divine essence, 
and by one understood intention which is the divine Word." ^_Every form, so far as it is 
something positive, is a perfection. God's intellect includes in His essence what is proper to 
each thing, by understanding where it is like Him and where unlike; for instance life, not 
knowledge, is the essence of a plant, and knowledge, not intellect, is the essence of an animal. 
Thus a plant is like God in being alive, but unlike in not having knowledge; an animal is like 
God in having knowledge, but unlike in not having intellect. It is always by a negation that a 
creature differs from God. 

God understands all things at the same instant. His knowledge is not a habit, and is not 
discursive or argumentative. God is truth. (This is to be understood literally.) 

We come now to a question which had already troubled both Plato and Aristotle. Can God 
know particular things, or does He only know universals and general truths? A Christian, since 
he believes in Provi- 


* Summa contra Gentiles, Bk. I, Ch. LIII. 


- 456 - 

dence, must hold that God knows particular things; nevertheless there are weighty arguments 
against this view. Saint Thomas enumerates seven such arguments, and then proceeds to refute 
them. The seven arguments are as follows: 

Singularity being signate matter, nothing immaterial can know it. 

Singulars do not always exist, and cannot be known when they do not exist; therefore 
they cannot be known by an unchanging being. 

Singulars are contingent, not necessary; therefore there can be no certain knowledge of 
them except when they exist. 

Some singulars are due to volitions, which can only be known to the person willing. 
Singulars are infinite in number, and the infinite as such is unknown. 

Singulars are too petty for God's attention. 


In some singulars there is evil, but God cannot know evil. 


Aquinas replies that God knows singulars as their cause; that He knows things that do not yet 
exist, just as an artificer does when he is making something; that He knows future contingents, 
because He sees each thing in time as if present, He Himself being not in time; that He knows 
our minds and secret wills, and that He knows an infinity of things, although we cannot do so. 
He knows trivial things, because nothing is wholly trivial, and everything has some nobility; 
otherwise God would know only Himself. Moreover the order of the universe is very noble, and 
this cannot be known without knowing even the trivial parts. Finally, God knows evil things, 
because knowing anything good involves knowing the opposite evil. 

In God there is Will; His Will is His essence, and its principal object is the divine essence. In 
willing Himself, God wills other things also, for God is the end of all things. He wills even 
things that are not yet. He wills His own being and goodness, but other things, though He wills 
them, He does not will necessarily. There is free will in God; a reason can be assigned for His 
volition, but not a cause. He cannot will things impossible in themselves; for example, He 
cannot make a contradiction true. The Saint's example of something beyond even divine power 
is not an altogether happy one; he says that God could not make a man be an ass. 

In God are delight and joy and love; God hates nothing, and pos- 

- 457 - 



sesses the contemplative and active virtues. He is happy, and is His own happiness. 

We come now (in Book II) to the consideration of creatures. This is useful for refuting errors 
against God. God created the world out of nothing, contrary to the opinions of the ancients. The 
subject of the things that God cannot do is resumed. He cannot be a body, or change Himself; He 
cannot fail; He cannot be weary, or forget, or repent, or be angry or sad; He cannot make a man 
have no soul, or make the sum of the angles of a triangle be not two right angles. He cannot undo 
the past, commit sins, make another God, or make Himself not exist. 

Book II is mainly occupied with the soul in man. All intellectual substances are immaterial and 
incorruptible; angels have no bodies, but in men the soul is united to a body. It is the form of the 
body, as in Aristotle. There are not three souls in man, but only one. The whole soul is present 
entire in every part of the body. The souls of animals, unlike those of men, are not immortal. The 
intellect is part of each man’s soul; there is not, as Averroes maintained, only one intellect, in 
which various men participate. The soul is not transmitted with the semen, but is created afresh 
with each man. There is, it is true, a difficulty: when a man is bom out of wedlock, this seems to 
make God an accomplice in adultery. This objection, however, is only specious. (There is a grave 
objection, which troubled Saint Augustine, and that is as to the transmission of original sin. It is 
the soul that sins, and if the soul is not transmitted, but created afresh, how can it inherit the sin of 
Adam? This is not discussed.) 

In connection with the intellect, the problem of universals is discussed. Saint Thomas's position is 
that of Aristotle. Universals do not subsist outside the soul, but the intellect, in understanding 
universals, understands things that are outside the soul. 

The Third Book is largely concerned with ethical questions. Evil is unintentional, not an essence, 
and has an accidental cause which is good. All things tend to be like God, who is the End of all 
things. Human happiness does not consist in carnal pleasures, honour, glory, wealth, worldly 
power, or goods of the body, and is not seated in the senses. Man’s ultimate happiness does not 
consist in acts of moral virtue, because these are means; it consists in the contemplation of God. 
But the knowledge of God possessed by the majority does not 


- 458 - 



suffice; nor the knowledge of Him obtained by demonstration; nor even the knowledge obtained 
by faith. In this life, we cannot see God in His essence, or have ultimate happiness; but hereafter 
we shall see Him face to face. (Not literally, we are warned, because God has no face.) This will 
happen, not by our natural power, but by the divine light; and even then, we shall not see all of 
Him. By this vision we become partakers of eternal life, i.e., of life outside time. 

Divine Providence does not exclude evil, contingency, free will, chance or luck. Evil comes 
through second causes, as in the case of a good artist with bad tools. 

Angels are not all equals; there is an order among them. Each angel is the sole specimen of his 
species, for, since angels have no bodies, they can only be distinct through specific differences, 
not through position in space. 

Astrology is to be rejected, for the usual reasons. In answer to the question "Is there such a thing 
as fate?" Aquinas replies that we might give the name "fate" to the order impressed by Providence, 
but it is wiser not to do so, as "fate" is a pagan word. This leads to an argument that prayer is 
useful although Providence is unchangeable. (I have failed to follow this argument.) God 
sometimes works miracles, but no one else can. Magic, however, is possible with the help of 
demons; this is not properly miraculous, and is not by the help of the stars. 

Divine law directs us to love God; also, in a lesser degree, our neighbour. It forbids fornication, 
because the father should stay with the mother while the children are being reared. It forbids birth 
control, as being against nature; it does not, however, on this account forbid lifelong celibacy. 
Matrimony should be indissoluble, because the father is needed in the education of the children, 
both as more rational than the mother, and as having more physical strength when punishment is 
required. Not all carnal intercourse is sinful, since it is natural; but to think the married state as 
good as continence is to fall into the heresy of Jovinian. There must be strict monogamy; polygyny 
is unfair to women, and polyandry makes paternity uncertain. Incest is to be forbidden because it 
would complicate family life. Against brothersister incest there is a very curious argument: that if 
the love of husband and wife were combined with that of brother and sister, mutual attraction 
would be so strong as to cause unduly frequent intercourse. 

All these arguments on sexual ethics, it is to be observed, appeal to 


- 459 - 



purely rational considerations, not to divine commands and prohibitions. Here, as throughout 
the first three books, Aquinas is glad, at the end of a piece of reasoning, to quote texts showing 
that reason has led him to a conclusion in harmony with the Scriptures, but he does not appeal 
to authority until his result has been reached. 

There is a most lively and interesting discussion of voluntary poverty, which, as one might 
expect, arrives ultimately at a conclusion in harmony with the principles of the mendicant 
orders, but states the objections with a force and realism which shows them to be such as he had 
actually heard urged by the secular clergy 

He then passes on to sin, predestination, and election, on which his view is broadly that of 
Augustine. By mortal sin a man forfeits his last end to all eternity, and therefore eternal 
punishment is his due. No man can be freed from sin except by grace, and yet the sinner is to be 
blamed if he is not converted. Man needs grace to persevere in good, but no one can merit 
divine assistance. God is not the cause of sinning, but some He leaves in sin, while others He 
delivers from it. As regards predestination, Saint Thomas seems to hold, with Saint Augustine, 
that no reason can be given why some are elected and go to heaven, while others are left 
reprobate and go to hell. He holds also that no man can enter heaven unless he has been 
baptized. This is not one of the truths that can be proved by the unaided reason; it is revealed in 
John III, 5. 

The fourth book is concerned with the Trinity, the Incarnation, the supremacy of the Pope, the 
sacraments, and the resurrection of the body. In the main, it is addressed to theologians rather 
than philosophers, and I shall therefore deal with it only briefly. 

There are three ways of knowing God: by reason, by revelation, and by intuition of things 
previously known only by revelation. Of the third way, however, he says almost nothing. A 
writer inclined to mysticism would have said more of it than of either of the others, but 
Aquinas's temperament is ratiocinative rather than mystical. 

The Greek Church is blamed for denying the double procession of the Holy Ghost and the 
supremacy of the Pope. We are warned that, although Christ was conceived of the Holy Ghost, 
we must not 


* " Jesus answered, verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born of water and of the 
Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." 


- 460 - 


suppose that He was the son of the Holy Ghost according to the flesh. 

The sacraments are valid even when dispensed by wicked ministers. This was an important point 
in Church doctrine. Very many priests lived in mortal sin, and pious people feared that such 
priests could not administer the sacraments. This was awkward; no one could know if he was 
really married, or if he had received valid absolution. It led to heresy and schism, since the 
puritanically minded sought to establish a separate priesthood of more impeccable virtue. The 
Church, in consequence, was obliged to assert with great emphasis that sin in a priest did not 
incapacitate him for the perfonnance of his functions. 

One of the last questions discussed is the resurrection of the body. Here, as elsewhere, Aquinas 
states very fairly the arguments that have been brought against orthodox position. One of these, at 
first sight, offers great difficulties. What is to happen, asks the Saint, to a man who never, 
throughout his life, ate anything but human flesh, and whose parents did likewise? It would seem 
unfair to his victims that they should be deprived of their bodies at the last day as a consequence 
of his greed; yet, if not, what will be left to make up his body; I am happy to say that this 
difficulty, which might at first sight seem insuperable, is triumphantly met. The identity of the 
body, Saint Thomas points out, is not dependent on the persistence of the same material particles; 
during life, by the processes of eating and digesting, the matter composing the body undergoes 
perpetual change. The cannibal may, therefore, receive the same body at the resurrection, even if it 
is not composed of the same matter as was in his body when he died. With this comforting 
thought we may end our abstract of the Summa contra Gentiles. 

In its general outlines, the philosophy of Aquinas agrees with that of Aristotle, and will be 
accepted or rejected by a reader in the measure in which he accepts or rejects the philosophy of the 
Stagyrite. The originality of Aquinas is shown in his adaptation of Aristotle to Christian dogma, 
with a minimum of alteration. In his day he was considered a bold innovator; even after his death 
many of his doctrines were condemned by the universities of Paris and Oxford. He was even more 
remarkable for systematizing than for originality. Even if every one of his doctrines were 
mistaken, the Summa would remain an imposing intellectual edifice. When he wishes to refute 
some 


- 461 - 



doctrine, he states it first, often with great force, and almost always with an attempt at fairness. 

The sharpness and clarity with which he distinguishes arguments derived from reason and 
arguments derived from revelation are admirable. He knows Aristotle well, and understands him 
thoroughly, which cannot be said of any earlier Catholic philosopher. 

These merits, however, seem scarcely sufficient to justify his immense reputation. The appeal to 
reason is, in a sense, insincere, since the conclusion to be reached is fixed in advance. Take, for 
example, the indissolubility of marriage. This is advocated on the ground that the father is useful 
in the education of the children, (a) because he is more rational than the mother, (b) because, 
being stronger, he is better able to inflict physical punishment. A modem educator might retort (a) 
that there is no reason to suppose men in general more rational than women, (b) that the sort of 
punishment that requires great physical strength is not desirable in education. He might go on to 
point out that fathers, in the modem world, have scarcely any part in education. But no follower of 
Saint Thomas would, on that account, cease to believe in lifelong monogamy, because the real 
grounds of belief are not those which are alleged. 

Or take again the arguments professing to prove the existence of God. All of these, except the one 
from teleology in lifeless things, depend upon the supposed impossibility of a series having no 
first tenn. Every mathematician knows that there is no such impossibility; the series of negative 
integers ending with minus one is an instance to the contrary. But here again no Catholic is likely 
to abandon belief in God even if he becomes convinced that Saint Thomas's arguments are bad; he 
will invent other arguments, or take refuge in revelation. 

The contentions that God's essence and existence are one and the same, that God is His own 
goodness, His own power, and so on, suggest a confusion, found in Plato, but supposed to have 
been avoided by Aristotle, between the manner of being of particulars and the manner of being of 
universals. God's essence is, one must suppose, of the nature of universals, while His existence is 
not. It is not easy to state this difficulty satisfactorily, since it occurs within a logic that can no 
longer be accepted. But it points clearly to some kind of syntactical confusion, without which 
much of the argumentation about God would lose its plausibility. 


- 462 - 



There is little of the true philosophic spirit in Aquinas. He does not, like the Platonic Socrates, set 
out to follow wherever the argument may lead. He is not engaged in an inquiry, the result of which 
it is impossible to know in advance. Before he begins to philosophize, he already knows the truth; 
it is declared in the Catholic faith. If he can find apparently rational arguments for some parts of 
the faith, so much the better; if he cannot, he need only fall back on revelation. The finding of 
arguments for a conclusion given in advance is not philosophy, but special pleading. I cannot, 
therefore, feel that he deserves to be put on a level with the best philosophers either of Greece or 
of modern times. 


CHAPTER XIV Franciscan Schoolmen 

FRANCISCANS, on the whole, were less impeccably orthodox than Dominicans. Between the 
two orders there was keen rivalry, and the Franciscans were not inclined to accept the authority of 
Saint Thomas. The three most important of Franciscan philosophers were Roger Bacon, Duns 
Scotus, and William of Occam. Saint Bonaventura and Matthew of Aquasparta also call for 
notice. 

Roger Bacon ( ca . 1214-ca. 1294) was not greatly admired in his own day, but in modem times has 
been praised far beyond his deserts. He was not so much a philosopher, in the narrow sense, as a 
man of universal learning with a passion for mathematics and science. Science, in his day, was 
mixed up with alchemy, and thought to be mixed up with black magic; Bacon was constantly 
getting into trouble through being suspected of heresy and magic. In 1257, Saint Bonaventura, the 
General of the Franciscan order, placed him under surveillance in Paris, and forbade him to 
publish. Nevertheless, while this prohibition was still in force, the papal legate in England, Guy de 
Foulques, commanded him, contrary orders notwithstanding, to write out his phi- 

- 463 - 



losophy for the benefit of the Pope. He therefore produced in a very short time three books, Opus 
Majus, Opus Minus, and Opus Tertium. These seem to have produced a good impression, and in 
1268 he was allowed to return to Oxford, from which he had been removed to a sort of 
imprisonment in Paris. However, nothing could teach him caution. He made a practice of 
contemptuous criticism of all the most learned of his contemporaries; in particular, he maintained 
that the translators from Greek and Arabic were grossly incompetent. In 1271, he wrote a book 
called Compendium Studii Philosophiae, in which he attacked clerical ignorance. This did nothing 
to add to his popularity among his colleagues, and in 1778 his books were condemned by the 
General of the order, and he was put in prison for fourteen years. In 1292 he was liberated, but 
died not long afterwards. 

He was encyclopAjdic in his learning, but not systematic. Unlike most philosophers of the time, 
he valued experiment highly, and illustrated its importance by the theory of the rainbow. He wrote 
well on geography; Columbus read this part of his work, and was influenced by it. He was a good 
mathematician; he quotes the sixth and ninth books of Euclid. He treated of perspective, following 
Arabic sources. Logic he thought a useless study; alchemy, on the other hand, he valued enough to 
write on it. 

To give an idea of his scope and method, I will summarize some parts of the Opus Majus. 

There are, he says, four causes of ignorance: First, the example of frail and unsuitable authority. 
(The work being written for the Pope, he is careful to say that this does not include the Church.) 
Second, the influence of custom. Third, the opinion of the unlearned crowd. (This, one gathers, 
includes all his contemporaries except himself.) Fourth, the concealment of one's ignorance in a 
display of apparent wisdom. From these four plagues, of which the fourth is the worst, spring all 
human evils. 

In supporting an opinion, it is a mistake to argue from the wisdom of our ancestors, or from 
custom, or from common belief. In support of his view he quotes Seneca, Cicero, Avicenna, 
Averroes, Adelard of Bath, Saint Jerome, and Saint John Chrysostom. These authorities, he seems 
to think, suffice to prove that one should not respect authority. 

His respect for Aristotle is great, but not unbounded. "Only Aristotle, together with his followers, 
has been called philosopher in the 


- 464 - 



judgement of all wise men." Like almost all his contemporaries, he uses the designation "The 
Philosopher" when he speaks of Aristotle, but even the Stagyrite, we are told, did not come to 
the limit of human wisdom. After him, Avicenna was "the prince and leader of philosophy," 
though he did not fully understand the rainbow, because he did not recognize its final cause, 
which, according to Genesis, is the dissipation of aqueous vapour. (Nevertheless, when Bacon 
comes to treat of the rainbow, he quotes Avicenna with great admiration.) Every now and then 
he says something that has a flavour of orthodoxy, such as that the only perfect wisdom is in the 
Scriptures, as explained by canon law and philosophy. But he sounds more sincere when he 
says that there is no objection to getting knowledge from the heathen; in addition to Avicenna 

and Averroes, he quotes Alfarabi jlvcry often, and Albumazar —and others from time to time. 
Albumazar is quoted to prove that mathematics was known before the Flood and by Noah and 
his sons; this, I suppose, is a sample of what we may learn from infidels. Bacon praises 
mathematics as the sole (unrevealed) source of certitude, and as needed for astronomy and 
astrology. 

Bacon follows Averroes in holding that the active intellect is a substance separated from the 
soul in essence. He quotes various eminent divines, among them Grosseteste, bishop of 
Lincoln, as also supporting this opinion, which is contrary to that of Saint Thomas. Apparently 
contrary passages in Aristotle, he says, are due to mistranslation. He does not quote Plato at first 
hand, but at second hand through Cicero, or at third hand through the Arabs on Porphyry. Not 
that he has much respect for Porphyry, whose doctrine on universals he calls "childish." 

In modern times Bacon has been praised because he valued experiment, as a source of 
knowledge, more than argument. Certainly his interests and his way of dealing with subjects are 
very different from those of the typical scholastics. His encyclopAjdic tendencies are like those 
of the Arabic writers, who evidently influenced him more profoundly than they did most other 
Christian philosophers. They, like him, were interested in science, and believed in magic and 
astrology, whereas Christians thought magic wicked and astrology a delusion. He is astonishing 
because he differs so widely from other medieval 


* Follower of Kindi; d. 950. 


a 

g Astronomer, 805-885. 


- 465 - 


Christian philosophers, but he had little influence in his own time, and was not, to my mind, so 
scientific as is sometimes thought. English writers used to say that he invented gunpowder, but 
this, of course, is untrue. 

Saint Bonaventura ( 1221-1274), who, as General of the Franciscan order, forbade Bacon to 
publish, was a man of a totally different kind. He belonged to the tradition of Saint Anselm, 
whose ontological argument he upheld. He saw in the new Aristotelianism a fundamental 
opposition to Christianity. He believed in Platonic ideas, which, however, only God knows 
perfectly. In his writings Augustine is quoted constantly, but one finds no quotations from Arabs, 
and few from pagan antiquity. 

Matthew of Aquasparta ( ca . 1235-1302)was a follower of Bonaventura, but less untouched by the 
new philosophy. He was a Franciscan, and became a cardinal; he opposed Saint Thomas from an 
Augustinian point of view. But to him Aristotle has become "The Philosopher"; he is quoted 
constantly. Avicenna is frequently mentioned; Saint Anselm is quoted with respect, as is the 
pseudo-Dionysius; but the chief authority is Saint Augustine. We must, he says, find a middle way 
between Plato and Aristotle. Plato's ideas are "utterly erroneous"; they establish wisdom, but not 
knowledge. On the other hand, Aristotle is also wrong; he establishes knowledge, but not wisdom. 
Our knowledge— so it is concluded— is caused by both lower and higher things, by external objects 
and ideal reasons. 

Duns Scotus {ca. 1270-1308) carried on the Franciscan controversy with Aquinas. He was born in 
Scotland or Ulster, became a Franciscan at Oxford, and spent his later years at Paris. Against Saint 
Thomas, he defended the Immaculate Conception, and in this the University of Paris, and 
ultimately the whole Catholic Church, agreed with him. He is Augustinian, but in a less extreme 
form than Bonaventura, or even Matthew of Aquasparta; his differences from Saint Thomas, like 
theirs, come of a larger admixture of Platonism (via Augustine) in his philosophy. 

He discusses, for example, the question "Whether any sure and pure truth can be known naturally 
by the understanding of the wayfarer without the special illumination of the uncreated light?" And 
he argues that it cannot. He supports this view, in his opening argument, solely by quotations from 
Saint Augustine; the only difficulty he 


- 466 - 



finds is Romans I, 20: "The invisible things of God, understood by means of those things that have 
been made, are clearly comprehended from the creation of the world." 

Duns Scotus was a moderate realist. He believed in free will, and had leanings towards 
Pelagianism. He held that being is no different from essence. He was mainly interested in 
evidence, i.e., the kinds of things that can be known without proof. Of these there are three kinds: 
(1) principles known by themselves, (2) things known by experience, (3) our own actions. But 
without divine illumination we can know nothing. 

Most Franciscans followed Duns Scotus rather than Aquinas. 

Duns Scotus held that, since there is no difference between being and essence, the "principle of 
individuation"— i.e., that which makes one thing not identical with another— must be form, not 
matter. The "principle of individuation" was one of the important problems of the scholastic 
philosophy. In various fonns, it has remained a problem to the present day. Without reference to 
any particular author, we may perhaps state the problem as follows. 

Among the properties of individual things, some are essential, others accidental; the accidental 
properties of a thing are those it can lose without losing its identity— such as wearing a hat, if you 
are a man. The question now arises: given two individual things belonging to the same species, do 
they always differ in essence, or is it possible for the essence to be exactly the same in both? Saint 
Thomas holds the latter view as regards material substances, the former as regards those that are 
immaterial. Duns Scotus holds that there are always differences of essence between two different 
individual things. The view of Saint Thomas depends upon the theory that pure matter consists of 
undifferentiated parts, which are distinguished solely by difference of position in space. Thus a 
person, consisting of mind and body, may differ physically from another person solely by the 
spatial position of his body. (This might happen with identical twins, theoretically.) Duns Scotus, 
on the other hand, holds that if things are distinct, they must be distinguished by some qualitative 
difference. This view, clearly, is nearer to Platonism than is that of Saint Thomas. 

Various stages have to be traversed before we can state this problem in modern tenns. The first 
step, which was taken by Leibniz, was to get rid of the distinction between essential and 
accidental 


- 467 - 



properties, which, like many that the scholastics took over from Aristotle, turns out to be unreal as 
soon as we attempt to state it carefully. We thus have, instead of "essence," "all the propositions 
that are true of the thing in question." (In general, however, spatial and temporal position would 
still be excluded.) Leibniz contends that it is impossible for two things to be exactly alike in this 
sense; this is his principle of the "identity of indiscernibles." This principle was criticized by 
physicists, who maintained that two particles of matter might differ solely as regards position in 
space and time— a view which has been rendered more difficult by relativity, which reduces space 
and time to relations. 

A further step is required in modernizing the problem, and that is, to get rid of the conception of 
"substance." When this is done, a "thing" has to be a bundle of qualities, since there is no longer 
any kernel of pure "thinghood." It would seem to follow that, if "substance" is rejected, we must 
take a view more akin to that of Scotus than to that of Aquinas. This, however, involves much 
difficulty in connection with space and time. I have treated the question as I see it, under the 
heading "Proper Names," in my Inquiry into Meaning and Truth. 

William of Occam is, after Saint Thomas, the most important schoolman. The circumstances of 
his life are very imperfectly known. He was born probably between 1290 and 1300; he died on 
April 10, but whether in 1349 or 1350 is uncertain. (The Black Death was raging in 1349, so that 
this is perhaps the more probable year.) Most people say he was born at Ockham in Surrey, but 
Delisle Bums prefers Ockham in Yorkshire. He was at Oxford, and then at Paris, where he was 
first the pupil and afterwards the rival of Duns Scotus. He was involved in the quarrel of the 
Franciscan order with Pope John XXII on the subject of poverty. The Pope had persecuted the 
Spirituals, with the support of Michael Cesena, General of the order. But there had been an 
arrangement by which property left to the friars was given by them to the Pope, who allowed them 
the benefit of it without the sin of ownership. This was ended by John XXII, who said they should 
accept outright ownership. At this a majority of the order, headed by Michael of Cesena, rebelled. 
Occam, who had been summoned to Avignon by the Pope to answer charges of heresy as to 
transubstantiation, sided with Michael of Cesena, as did another 


- 468 - 



important man, Marsiglio of Padua. All three were excommunicated in 1328, but escaped from 
Avignon, and took refuge with the Emperor Louis. Louis was one of the two claimants to the 
Empire; he was the one favoured by Gennany, but the other was favoured by the Pope. The Pope 
excommunicated Louis, who appealed against him to a General Council. The Pope himself was 
accused of heresy. 

It is said that Occam, on meeting the Emperor, said: "Do you defend me with the sword, and I will 
defend you with the pen." At any rate, he and Marsiglio of Padua settled in Munich, under the 
protection of the Emperor, and there wrote political treatises of considerable importance. What 
happened to Occam after the Emperor's death in 1338 is uncertain. Some say he was reconciled to 
the Church, but this seems to be false. 

The Empire was no longer what it had been in the Hohenstaufen era; and the papacy, though its 
pretensions had grown continually greater, did not command the same reverence as formerly. 
Boniface VIII had moved it to Avignon at the beginning of the fourteenth century, and the Pope 
had become a political subordinate of the king of France. The Empire had su nk even more; it 
could no longer claim even the most shadowy kind of universal dominion, because of the strength 
of France and England; on the other hand, the Pope, by subservience to the king of France, also 
weakened his claim to universality in temporal matters. Thus the conflict between Pope and 
Emperor was really a conflict between France and Gennany. England, under Edward III, was at 
war with France, and therefore in alliance with Gennany; this caused England, also, to be 
antipapal. The Pope's enemies demanded a General Council— the only ecclesiastical authority 
which could be regarded as superior to the Pope. 

The character of the opposition to the Pope changed at this time. Instead of being merely in favour 
of the Emperor, it acquired a democratic tone, particularly in matters of Church government. This 
gave it a new strength, which ultimately led to the Reformation. 

Dante ( 1265-1321), though as a poet he was a great innovator, was, as a thinker, somewhat 
behind the times. His book De Monarchia is Ghibelline in outlook, and would have been more 
timely a hundred years earlier. He regards Emperor and Pope as independent, and both divinely 
appointed. In the Divine Comedy, his Satan has three mouths, in which he eternally chews Judas 
Iscariot, Brutus, and 


- 469 - 



Cassius, who are all three equally traitors, the first against Christ, the other two against Caesar. 
Dante's thought is interesting, not only in itself, but as that of a layman; but it was not influential, 
and was hopelessly out of date. 

Marsiglio of Padua ( 1270-1342), on the contrary, inaugurated the new fonn of opposition to the 
Pope, in which the Emperor has mainly a role of decorative dignity. He was a close friend of 
William of Occam, whose political opinions he influenced. Politically, he is more important than 
Occam, He holds that the legislator is the majority of the people, and that the majority has the 
right to punish princes. He applies popular sovereignty also to the Church, and he includes the 
laity. There are to be local councils of the people, including the laity, who are to elect 
representatives to General Councils. The General Council alone should have power to 
excommunicate, and to give authoritative interpretations of Scripture. Thus all believers will have 
a voice in deciding doctrine. The Church is to have no secular authority; there is to be no 
excommunication without civil concurrence; and the Pope is to have no special powers. 

Occam did not go quite so far as Marsiglio, but he worked out a completely democratic method of 
electing the General Council. 

The conciliar movement came to a head in the early fifteenth century, when it was needed to heal 
the Great Schism. But having accomplished this task, it subsided. Its standpoint, as may be seen 
already in Marsiglio, was different from that afterwards adopted, in theory, by the Protestants. The 
Protestants claimed the right of private judgement, and were not willing to submit to a General 
Council. They held that religious belief is not a matter to be decided by any governmental 
machinery. Marsiglio, on the contrary, still aims at preserving the unity of the Catholic faith, but 
wishes this to be done by democratic means, not by the papal absolutism. In practice, most 
Protestants, when they acquired the government, merely substituted the King for the Pope, and 
thus secured neither liberty of private judgement nor a democratic method of deciding doctrinal 
questions. But in their opposition to the Pope they found support in the doctrines of the conciliar 
movement. Of all the schoolmen, Occam was the one whom Luther preferred. It must be said that 
a considerable section of Protestants held to the doctrine of private judgement even where the 
State was Protestant. This was the chief 


- 470 - 



point of difference between Independents and Presbyterians in the English Civil War. 

Occam's political works jyare written in the style of philosophic disputations, with arguments 
for and against various theses, sometimes not reaching any conclusion. We are accustomed to a 
more forthright kind of political propaganda, but in his day the form he chose was probably 
effective. 

A few samples will illustrate his method and outlook. 

There is a long treatise called "Eight Questions Concerning the Power of the Pope." The first 
question is whether one man can rightfully be supreme both in Church and State. The second: Is 
secular authority derived immediately from God or not? Third: Has the Pope the right to grant 
secular jurisdiction to the Emperor and other princes? Fourth: Does election by the electors give 
full powers to the German king? Fifth and sixth: What rights does the Church acquire through 
the right of bishops to anoint kings? Seventh: Is a coronation ceremony valid if perfonned by 
the wrong archbishop? Eighth: Does election by the electors give the Gennan king the title of 
Emperor? All these were, at the time, burning questions of practical politics. 

Another treatise is on the question whether a prince can obtain the goods of the Church without 
the Pope's permission. This is concerned to justify Edward III in taxing the clergy for his war 
with France. It will be remembered that Edward was an ally of the Emperor. 

Then comes a "Consultation on a matrimonial cause," on the question whether the Emperor was 
justified in marrying his cousin. 

It will be seen that Occam did his best to deserve the protection of the Emperor's sword. 

It is time now to turn to Occam's purely philosophical doctrines. On this subject there is a very 
good book, The Logic of William of Occam, by Ernest E. Moody. Much of what I shall have to 
say is based on this book, which takes a somewhat unusual view, but, I think, a correct one. 
There is a tendency in writers on history of philosophy to interpret men in the light of their 
successors, but this is generally a mistake. Occam has been regarded as bringing about 


* See Guilleimi de Ockham Opera Politica, Manchester University Press, 1940. 


- 471 - 


the breakdown of scholasticism, as a precursor of Descartes or Kant or whoever might be the 
particular commentator's favourite among modern philosophers. According to Moody, with 
whom I agree, all this is a mistake. Occam, he holds, was mainly concerned to restore a pure 
Aristotle, freed from both Augustinian and Arabic influences. This had also been, to a 
considerable extent, the aim of Saint Thomas; but the Franciscans, as we have seen, had 
continued to follow Saint Augustine much more closely than he did. The interpretation of 
Occam by modern historians, according to Moody, has been vitiated by the desire to find a 
gradual transition from scholastic to modern philosophy; this has caused people to read modern 
doctrines into him, when in fact he is only interpreting Aristotle. 

Occam is best known for a maxim which is not to be found in his works, but has acquired the 
name of "Occam's razor." This maxim says: "Entities are not to be multiplied without 
necessity." Although he did not say this, he said something which has much the same effect, 
namely: "It is vain to do with more what can be done with fewer." That is to say, if everything 
in some science can be interpreted without assuming this or that hypothetical entity, there is no 
ground for assuming it. I have myself found this a most fruitful principle in logical analysis. 

In logic, though apparently not in metaphysics, Occam was a nominalist; the nominalists of the 
fifteenth century Mooked upon him as the founder of their school. He thought that Aristotle had 
been misinterpreted by the Scotists, and that this misinterpretation was due partly to the 
influence of Augustine, partly to Avicenna, but partly to an earlier cause, Porphyry's treatise on 
Aristotle Categories. Porphyry in this treatise raised three questions: (1) Are genera and species 
substances? (2) Are they corporeal or incorporeal? (3) If the latter, are they in sensible things or 
separated from them? He raised these questions as relevant to Aristotle's Categories, and thus 
led the Middle Ages to interpret the Organon too metaphysically. Aquinas had attempted to 
undo this error, but it had been reintroduced by Duns Scotus. The result had been that logic and 
theory of knowledge had become dependent on metaphysics and theology. Occam set to work 
to separate them again. 


* E.g., Swineshead, Heytesbury, Gerson, and d’Ailly. 


- 472 - 


For Occam, logic is an instrument for the philosophy of nature, which can be independent of 
metaphysics. Logic is the analysis of discursive science; science is about things, but logic is not. 
Things are individual, but among terms there are universals; logic treats of universals, while 
science uses them without discussing them. Logic is concerned with terms or concepts, not as 
psychical states, but as having meaning. "Man is a species" is not a proposition of logic, 
because it requires a knowledge of man. Logic deals with things fabricated by the mind within 
itself, which cannot exist except through the existence of reason. A concept is a natural sign, a 
word is a conventional sign. We must distinguish when we are speaking of the word as a thing, 
and when we are using it as having meaning, otherwise we may fall into fallacies such as: "Man 
is a species, Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is a species." 

Terms which point at things are called "terms of first intention"; terms which point at terms are 
called "terms of second intention." The terms in science are of first intention; in logic, of 
second. Metaphysical terms are peculiar in that they signify both things signified by words of 
first intention and things signified by words of second intention. There are exactly six 
metaphysical terms: being, thing, something, one, true, good. ^_These terms have the peculiarity 
that they can all be predicated of each other. But logic can be pursued independently of them. 

Understanding is of things, not of forms produced by the mind; these are not what is 
understood, but that by which things are understood. Universals, in logic, are only terms or 
concepts predicable of many other terms or concepts. Universal, genus, species are terms of 
second intention, and therefore cannot mean things. But since one and being are convertible, if 
a universal existed, it would be one, and an individual thing. A universal is merely a sign of 
many things. As to this, Occam agrees with Aquinas, as against Averroes, Avicenna, and the 
Augustinians. Both hold that there are only individual things, individual minds, and acts of 
understanding. Both Aquinas and Occam, it is true, admit the universale ante rein, but only to 
explain creation; it had to be in the mind of God before He could create. But this belongs to 
theology, not to the explanation of human 


* I do not here pause to criticize the use to which Occam puts these terms. 


- 473 - 


knowledge, which is only concerned with the universale post rem. In explaining human 
knowledge, Occam never allows universals to be things. Socrates is similar to Plato, he says, but 
not in virtue of a third thing called similarity. Similarity is a term of second intention, and is in the 
mind. (All this is good.) 

Propositions about future contingents, according to Occam, are not yet either true or false. He 
makes no attempt to reconcile this view with divine omniscience. Here, as elsewhere, he keeps 
logic free from metaphysics and theology. 

Some samples of Occam's discussions may be useful. 

He asks: "Whether that which is known by the understanding first according to a primacy of 
generation is the individual." 

Against: The universal is the first and proper object of the understanding. 

For: The object of sense and the object of understanding are the same, but the individual is the 
first object of sense. 

Accordingly, the meaning of the question must be stated. (Presumably, because both arguments 
seem strong.) 

He continues: "The thing outside the soul which is not a sign is understood first by such 
knowledge (i.e., by knowledge which is individual), therefore the individual is known first, since 
everything outside the soul is individual." 

He goes on to say that abstract knowledge always presupposes knowledge which is "intuitive" 

(i.e., of perception), and this is caused by individual things. 

He then ennumerates four doubts which may arise, and proceeds to resolve them. 

He concludes with an affirmative answer to his original question, but adds that "the universal is 
the first object by primacy of adequation, not by the primacy of generation." 

The question involved is whether, or how far, perception is the source of knowledge. It will be 
remembered that Plato, in the Theaetetus, rejects the definition of knowledge as perception. 
Occam, pretty certainly, did not know the Theaetetus, but if he had he would have disagreed with 
it. 

To the question "whether the sensitive soul and the intellective soul are really distinct in man," he 
answers that they are, though this is hard to prove. One of his arguments is that we may with our 
ap- 


- 474 - 



petites desire something which with our understanding we reject; therefore appetite and 
understanding belong to different subjects. Another argument is that sensations are subjectively 
in the sensitive soul, but not subjectively in the intellective soul. Again: the sensitive soul is 
extended and material, while the intellective soul is neither. Four objections are considered, all 
theological, jybut they are answered. The view taken by Occam on this question is not, perhaps, 
what might be expected. However, he agrees with Saint Thomas and disagrees with Averroes in 
thinking that each man’s intellect is his own, not something impersonal. 

By insisting on the possibility of studying logic and human knowledge without reference to 
metaphysics and theology, Occam's work encouraged scientific research. The Augustinians, he 
said, erred in first supposing things unintelligible and men unintelligent, and then adding a light 
from Infinity by which knowledge became possible. He agreed in this with Aquinas, but 
differed in emphasis, for Aquinas was primarily a theologian, and Occam was, so far as logic is 
concerned, primarily a secular philosopher. 

His attitude gave confidence to students of particular problems, for instance, his immediate 
follower Nicholas of Oresme (d. 1382), who investigated planetary theory. This man was, to a 
certain extent, a precursor of Copernicus; he set forth both the geocentric and the heliocentric 
theories, and said that each would explain all the facts known in his day, so that there was no 
way of deciding between them. 

After William of Occam there are no more great scholastics. The next period for great 
philosophers began in the late Renaissance. 


* For instance: Between Good Friday and Easter, Christ's soul descended into hell, whereas 
His body remained in the tomb of Joseph of Arimathea. If the sensitive soul is distinct 
from the intellective soul, did Christ's sensitive soul spend this time in hell or in the tomb? 


- 475 - 


CHAPTER XV The Eclipse of the Papacy 


THE thirteenth century had brought to completion a great synthesis, philosophical, theological, 
political, and social, which had been slowly built up by the combination of many elements. The 
first element was pure Greek philosophy, especially the philosophies of Pythagoras, 

Pannenides, Plato, and Aristotle. Then came, as a result of Alexander's conquests, a great influx 
of oriental beliefs. iLThese, taking advantage of Orphism and the Mysteries, transfonned the 
outlook of the Greek-speaking world, and ultimately of the Latin-speaking world also. The 
dying and resurrected god, the sacramental eating of what purported to be the flesh of the god, 
the second birth into a new life through some ceremony analogous to baptism, came to be part 
of the theology of large sections of the pagan Roman world. With these was associated an ethic 
of liberation from bondage to the flesh, which was, at least theoretically, ascetic. From Syria, 
Egypt, Babylonia, and Persia came the institution of a priesthood separated from the lay 
population, possessed of more or less magical powers, and able to exert considerable political 
influence. Impressive rituals, largely connected with belief in a life after death, came from the 
same sources. From Persia, in particular, came a dualism which regarded the world as the 
battleground of two great hosts, one, which was good, led by Ahura Mazda, the other, which 
was evil, led by Ahriman. Black magic was the kind that was worked by the help of Ahriman 
and his followers in the world of spirits. Satan is a development of Ahriman. 

This influx of barbarian ideas and practices was synthesized with certain Hellenic elements in 
the Neoplatonic philosophy. In Orphism, Pythagoreanism, and some parts of Plato, the Greeks 
had developed 


* See Cumont, Oriental Religions in Roman Paganism. 


- 476 - 


points of view which were easy to combine with those of the Orient, perhaps because they had 
been borrowed from the East at a much earlier time. With Plotinus and Porphyry the development 
of pagan philosophy ends. 

The thought of these men, however, though deeply religious, was not capable, without much 
transformation, of inspiring a victorious popular religion. Their philosophy was difficult, and 
could not be generally understood; their way of salvation was too intellectual for the masses. Their 
conservatism led them to uphold the traditional religion of Greece, which, however, they had to 
interpret allegorically in order to soften its immoral elements and to reconcile it with their 
philosophical monotheism. The Greek religion had fallen into decay, being unable to compete 
with Eastern rituals and theologies. The oracles had become silent, and the priesthood had never 
formed a powerful distinct caste. The attempt to revive Greek religion had therefore an archaistic 
character which gave it a certain feebleness and pedantry, especially noticeable in the Emperor 
Julian. Already in the third century, it could have been foreseen that some Asiatic religion would 
conquer the Roman world, though at that time there were still several competitors which all 
seemed to have a chance of victory. 

Christianity combined elements of strength from various sources. From the Jews it accepted a 
Sacred Book and the doctrine that all religions but one are false and evil; but it avoided the racial 
exclusiveness of the Jews and the inconveniences of the Mosaic law. Later Judaism had already 
leamt to believe in the life after death, but the Christians gave a new definiteness to heaven and 
hell, and to the ways of reaching the orte and escaping the other. Easter combined the Jewish 
Passover with pagan celebrations of the resurrected God. Persian dualism was absorbed, but with 
a firmer assurance of the ultimate omnipotence of the good principle, and with the addition that 
the pagan gods were followers of Satan. At first the Christians were not the equals of their 
adversaries in philosophy or in ritual, but gradually these deficiencies were made good. At first, 
philosophy was more advanced among the semi-Christian Gnostics than among the orthodox; but 
from the time of Origen onwards, the Christians developed an adequate philosophy by 
modification of Neoplatonism. Ritual among the early Christians is a somewhat obscure subject, 


- 477 - 



but at any rate by the time of Saint Ambrose it had become extremely impressive. The power and 
the separateness of the priesthood were taken from the East, but were gradually strengthened by 
methods of government, in the Church, which owed much to the practice of the Roman Empire. 
The Old Testament, the mystery religions, Greek philosophy, and Roman methods of 
administration were all blended in the Catholic Church, and combined to give it a strength which 
no earlier social organization had equalled. 

The Western Church, like ancient Rome, developed, though more slowly, from a republic into a 
monarchy. We have seen the stages in the growth of papal power, from Gregory the Great through 
Nicholas I, Gregory VII, and Innocent III, to the final defeat of the Hohenstaufen in the wars of 
Guelfs and Ghibellines. At the same time Christian philosophy, which had hitherto been 
Augustinian and therefore largely Platonic, was enriched by new elements due to contact with 
Constantinople and the Mohammedans. Aristotle, during the thirteenth century, came to be known 
fairly completely in the West, and, by the influence of Albertus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas, 
was established in the minds of the learned as the supreme authority after Scripture and the 
Church. Down to the present day, he has retained this position among Catholic philosophers. I 
cannot but think that the substitution of Aristotle for Plato and Saint Augustine was a mistake 
from the Christian point of view. Plato's temperament was more religious than Aristotle's, and 
Christian theology had been, from almost the first, adapted to Platonism. Plato had taught that 
knowledge is not perception, but a kind of reminiscent vision; Aristotle was much more of an 
empiricist. Saint Thomas, little though he intended it, prepared the way for the return from 
Platonic dreaming to scientific observation. 

Outward events had more to do than philosophy with the disintegration of the Catholic synthesis 
which began in the fourteenth century. The Byzantine Empire was conquered by the Latins in 
1204, and remained in their hands till 1261. During this time the religion of its government was 
Catholic, not Greek; but after 1261 Constantinople was lost to the Pope and never recovered, in 
spite of nominal union at Ferrara in 1438. The defeat of the Western Empire in its conflict with 
the papacy proved useless to the Church, owing to the rise of national monarchies in France and 
England; throughout most 


- 478 - 



of the fourteenth century the Pope was, politically, a tool in the hands of the King of France. More 
important than these causes was the rise of a rich commercial class and the increase of knowledge 
in the laity. Both of these began in Italy, and remained more advanced in that country than in other 
parts of the West until the middle of the sixteenth century. North Italian cities were much richer, 
in the fourteenth century, than any of the cities of the North; and learned laymen, especially in law 
and medicine, were becoming increasingly numerous. The cities had a spirit of independence 
which, now that the Emperor was no longer a menace, was apt to turn against the Pope. But the 
same movements, though to a lesser degree, existed elsewhere. Flanders prospered; so did the 
Hanse towns. In England the wool trade was a source of wealth. The age was one in which 
tendencies which may be broadly called democratic were very strong, and nationalistic tendencies 
were even stronger. The papacy, which had become very worldly, appeared largely as a taxing 
agency, drawing to itself vast revenues which most countries wished to retain at home. The popes 
no longer had or deserved the moral authority which had given them power. Saint Francis had 
been able to work in hannony with Innocent III and Gregory IX, but the most earnest men of the 
fourteenth century were driven into conflict with the papacy. 

At the beginning of the century, however, these causes of decline in the papacy were not yet 
apparent. Boniface VIII, in the Bull Unam Sanctam, made more extreme claims than had ever 
been made by any previous Pope. He instituted, in 1300, the year of Jubilee, when plenary 
indulgence is granted to all Catholics who visit Rome and perfonn certain ceremonies while there. 
This brought immense sums of money to the coffers of the Curia and the pockets of the Roman 
people. There was to be a Jubilee every hundredth year, but the profits were so great that the 
period was shortened to fifty years, and then to twenty-five, at which it remains to the present day. 
The first Jubilee, that of 1300, showed the Pope at the summit of his success, and may be 
conveniently regarded as the date from which the decline began. 

Boniface VIII was an Italian, bom at Anagni. He had been besieged in the Tower of London when 
in England, on behalf of the Pope, to support Henry III against the rebellious barons, but he was 


- 479 - 



rescued in 1267 by the king's son, afterwards Edward I. There was already in his day a powerful 
French party in the Church, and his election was opposed by the French cardinals. He came into 
violent conflict with the French king Philip IV, on the question whether the king had the right to 
tax the French clergy. Boniface was addicted to nepotism and avarice; he therefore wished to 
retain control over as many sources of revenue as possible. He was accused of heresy, probably 
with justice; it seems that he was an Averroist and did not believe in immortality. His quarrel with 
the King of France became so bitter that the king sent a force to arrest him, with a view to his 
being deposed by a General Council. He was caught at Anagni, but escaped to Rome, where he 
died. After this, for a long time, no pope ventured to oppose the King of France. 

After a very brief intermediate reign, the cardinals in 1305 elected the archbishop of Bordeaux, 
who took the name of Clement V. He was a Gascon, and consistently represented the French party 
in the Church. Throughout his pontificate he never went to Italy. He was crowned in Lyons, and in 
1309 he settled in Avignon, where the popes remained for about seventy years. Clement V 
signalized his alliance with the king of France by their joint action against the Templars. Both 
needed money, the Pope because he was addicted to favouritism and nepotism, Philip for the 
English war, the Flemish revolt, and the costs of an increasingly energetic government. After he 
had plundered the ba nk ers of Lombardy, and persecuted the Jews to the limit of "what the traffic 
would bear," it occurred to him that the Templars, in addition to being bankers, had immense 
landed estates in France, which, with the Pope's help, he might acquire. It was therefore arranged 
that the Church should discover that the Templars had fallen into heresy, and that king and pope 
should share the spoils. On a given day in 1307, all the leading Templars in France were arrested; 
a list of leading questions, previously drawn up, was put to them all; under torture, they confessed 
that they had done homage to Satan and committed various other abominations; at last, in 1313, 
the Pope suppressed the order, and all its property was confiscated. The best account of this 
proceeding is in Henry C. Lea's History of the Inquisition, where, after full investigation, the 
conclusion is reached that the charges against the Templars were wholly without foundation. 


- 480 - 



In the case of the Templars, the financial interests of pope and king coincided. But on most 
occasions, in most parts of Christendom, they conflicted. In the time of Boniface VIII, Philip IV 
had secured the support of the Estates (even the Estate of the Church) in his disputes with the 
Pope as to taxation. When the popes became politically subservient to France, the sovereigns 
hostile to the French king were necessarily hostile to the Pope. This led to the protection of 
William of Occam and Marsiglio of Padua by the Emperor; at a slightly later date, it led to the 
protection of Wycliffe by John of Gaunt. 

Bishops, in general, were by this time completely in subjection to the Pope; in an increasing 
proportion, they were actually appointed by him. The monastic orders and the Dominicans were 
equally obedient, but the Franciscans still had a certain spirit of independence. This led to their 
conflict with John XXII ( 1316-34), which we have already considered in connection with 
William of Occam. During this conflict, Marsiglio persuaded the Emperor to march on Rome, 
where the imperial crown was conferred on him by the populace, and a Franciscan antipope was 
elected after the populace had declared John XXII deposed. However, nothing came of all this 
beyond a general diminution of respect for the papacy. 

The revolt against papal domination took different forms in different places. Sometimes it was 
associated with monarchical nationalism, sometimes with a Puritan horror of the corruption and 
worldliness of the papal court. In Rome itself, the revolt was associated with an archaistic 
democracy. Under Clement VI ( 1342-52) Rome, for a time, sought to free itself from the absentee 
pope under the leadership of a remarkable man, Cola di Rienzi. Rome suffered not only from the 
rule of the popes, but also from the local aristocracy, which continued the turbulence that had 
degraded the papacy in the tenth century. Indeed it was partly to escape from the lawless Roman 
nobles that the popes had fled to Avignon. At first Rienzi, who was the son of a tavern-keeper, 
rebelled only against the nobles, and in this he had the support of the Pope. He roused so much 
popular enthusiasm that the nobles fled ( 1347). Petrarch, who admired him and wrote an ode to 
him, urged him to continue his great and noble work. He took the title of tribune, and proclaimed 
the sovereignty of the Roman people over the Empire. He seems to have 


- 481 - 



conceived this sovereignty democratically, for he called representatives from the Italian cities to a 
sort of parliament. Success, however, gave him delusions of grandeur. At this time, as at many 
others, there were rival claimants to the Empire. Rienzi summoned both of them, and the Electors, 
to come before him to have the issue decided. This naturally turned both imperial candidates 
against him, and also the Pope, who considered that it was for him to pronounce judgement in 
such matters. Rienzi was captured by the Pope ( 1352), and kept in prison for two years, until 
Clement VI died. Then he was released, and returned to Rome, where he acquired power again for 
a few months. On this second occasion, however, his popularity was brief, and in the end he was 
murdered by the mob. Byron, as well as Petrarch, wrote a poem in his praise. 

It became evident that, if the papacy was to remain effectively the head of the whole Catholic 
Church, it must free itself from dependence on France by returning to Rome. Moreover, the 
Anglo-French war, in which France was suffering severe defeats, made France unsafe. Urban V 
therefore went to Rome in 1367; but Italian politics were too complicated for him, and he returned 
to Avignon shortly before his death. The next Pope, Gregory XI, was more resolute. Hostility to 
the French curia had made many Italian towns, especially Florence, bitterly antipapal, but by 
returning to Rome and opposing the French cardinals Gregory did everything in his power to save 
the situation. However, at his death the French and Roman parties in the College of Cardinals 
proved irreconcilable. In accordance with the wishes of the Roman party, an Italian, Bartolomeo 
Prignano, was elected, and took the name of Urban VI. But a number of Cardinals declared his 
election uncanonical, and proceeded to elect Robert of Geneva, who belonged to the French party. 
He took the name of Clement VII, and lived in Avignon. 

Thus began the Great Schism, which lasted for some forty years. France, of course, recognized the 
Avignon Pope, and the enemies of France recognized the Roman Pope. Scotland was the enemy 
of England, and England of France therefore Scotland recognized the Avignon Pope. Each pope 
chose cardinals from among his own partisans, and when either died his cardinals quickly elected 
another. Thus there was no way of healing the schism except by bringing to bear some power 
superior to both popes. It was clear that one of them 


- 482 - 



must be legitimate, therefore a power superior to a legitimate pope had to be found. The only 
solution lay in a General Council. The University of Paris, led by Gerson, developed a new theory, 
giving powers of initiative to a council. The lay sovereigns, to whom the schism was 
inconvenient, lent their support. At last, in 1409, a council was summoned, and met at Pisa. It 
failed, however, in a ridiculous manner. It declared both popes deposed for heresy and schism, and 
elected a third, who promptly died; but his cardinals elected as his successor an ex-pirate named 
Baldassare Cossa, who took the name of John XXIII. Thus the net result was that there were three 
popes instead of two, the conciliar pope being a notorious ruffian. At this stage, the situation 
seemed more hopeless than ever. 

But the supporters of the conciliar movement did not give in. In 1414, a new council was 
summoned at Constance, and proceeded to vigorous action. It first decreed that popes cannot 
dissolve councils, and must submit to them in certain respects; it also decided that future popes 
must summon a General Council every seven years. It deposed John XXIII, and induced the 
Roman Pope to resign. The Avignon Pope refused to resign, and after his death the King of 
Aragon caused a successor to be elected. But France, at this time at the mercy of England, refused 
to recognize him, and his party dwindled into insignificance and finally ceased to exist. Thus at 
last there was no opposition to the Pope chosen by the council, who was elected in 1417, and took 
the name of Martin V. 

These proceedings were creditable, but the treatment of Huss, the Bohemian disciple of Wycliffe, 
was not. He was brought to Constance with the promise of a safe conduct, but when he got there 
he was condemned and suffered death at the stake. Wycliffe was safely dead, but the council 
ordered his bones dug up and burnt. The supporters of the conciliar movement were anxious to 
free themselves from all suspicion of unorthodoxy. 

The Council of Constance had healed the schism, but it had hoped to do much more, and to 
substitute a constitutional monarchy for the papal absolutism. Martin V had made many promises 
before his election; some he kept, some he broke. He had assented to the decree that a council 
should be summoned every seven years, and to this decree he remained obedient. The Council of 
Constance having been dissolved in 1417, a new council, which proved of no importance, 


- 483 - 



was summoned in 1424; then, in 1431, another was convoked to meet at Basel. Martin V died just 
at this moment, and his successor Eugenius IV was, throughout his pontificate, in bitter conflict 
with the refonners who controlled the council. He dissolved the council, but it refused to consider 
itself dissolved; in 1433 he gave way for a time, but in 1437 he dissolved it again. Nevertheless it 
remained in session till 1448, by which time it was obvious to all that the Pope had won a 
complete triumph. In 1439 the council had alienated sympathy by declaring the Pope deposed and 
electing an antipope (the last in history), who, however, resigned almost immediately. In the same 
year Eugenius IV won prestige by holding a council of his own at Ferrara, where the Greek 
Church, in desperate fear of the Turks, made a nominal submission to Rome. The papacy thus 
emerged politically triumphant, but with very greatly diminished power of inspiring moral 
reverence. 

Wycliffe (ca. 1320-84) illustrates, by his life and doctrine, the diminished authority of the papacy 
in the fourteenth century. Unlike the earlier schoolmen, he was a secular priest, not a monk or 
friar. He had a great reputation in Oxford, where he became a doctor of theology in 1372. For a 
short time he was Master of Balliol. He was the last of the important Oxford scholastics. As a 
philosopher, he was not progressive; he was a realist, and a Platonist rather than an Aristotelian. 
He held that God's decrees are not arbitrary, as some maintained; the actual world is not one 
among possible worlds, but is the only possible world, since God is bound to choose what is best. 
All this is not what makes him interesting, nor does it seem to have been what most interested 
him, for he retired from Oxford to the life of a country clergyman. During the last ten years of his 
life he was the parish priest of Lutterworth, by crown appointment. He continued, however, to 
lecture at Oxford. 

Wycliffe is remarkable for the extreme slowness of his development. In 1372, when his age was 
fifty or more, he was still orthodox; it was only after this date, apparently, that he became 
heretical. He seems to have been driven into heresy entirely by the strength of his moral feelings— 
his sympathy with the poor, and his horror of rich worldly ecclesiastics. At first his attack on the 
papacy was only political and moral, not doctrinal; it was only gradually that he was driven into 
wider revolt. 


- 484 - 



Wycliffe's departure from orthodoxy began in 1376 with a course of lectures at Oxford "On Civil 
Dominion." He advanced the theory that righteousness alone gives the title to dominion and 
property; that unrighteous clergy have no such title; and that the decision as to whether an 
ecclesiastic should retain his property or not ought to be taken by the civil power. He taught, 
further, that property is the result of sin; Christ and the Apostles had no property, and the clergy 
ought to have none. These doctrines offended all clerics except the friars. The English 
government, however, favoured them, for the Pope drew a huge tribute from England, and the 
doctrine that money should not be sent out of England to the Pope was a convenient one. This was 
especially the case while the Pope was subservient to France, and England was at war with 
France. John of Gaunt, who held power during the minority of Richard II, befriended Wycliffe as 
long as possible. Gregory XI, on the other hand, condemned eighteen theses in Wycliffe's lectures, 
saying that they were derived from Marsiglio of Padua. Wycliffe was summoned to appear for 
trial before a tribunal of bishops, but the queen and the mob protected him, while the University of 
Oxford refused to admit the Pope's jurisdiction over its teachers. (Even in those days, English 
universities believed in academic freedom.) 

Meanwhile Wycliffe continued, during 1378 and 1379, to write learned treatises, maintaining that 
the king is God’s vicar, and that bishops are subject to him. When the great schism came, he went 
further than before, branding the Pope as Antichrist, and saying that acceptance of the Donation of 
Constantine had made all subsequent popes apostates. He translated the Vulgate into English, and 
established "poor priests," who were secular. (By this action he at last annoyed the friars.) He 
employed the "poor priests" as itinerant preachers, whose mission was especially to the poor. At 
last, in attacking sacerdotal power, he was led to deny transubstantiation, which he called a deceit 
and a blasphemous folly. At this point, John of Gaunt ordered him to be silent. 

The Peasants' Revolt of 1381, led by Wat Tyler, made matters more difficult for Wycliffe. There 
is no evidence that he actively encouraged it, but, unlike Luther in similar circumstances, he 
refrained from condemning it. John Ball, the Socialist unfrocked priest who was one of the 
leaders, admired Wycliffe, which was embarrassing. 


- 485 - 



But as he had been excommunicated in 1366, when Wycliffe was still orthodox, he must have 
arrived independently at his opinions. Wycliffe's communistic opinions, though no doubt the 
"poor priests" disseminated them, were, by him, only stated in Latin, so that at first hand they were 
inaccessible to peasants. 

It is surprising that Wycliffe did not suffer more than he did for his opinions and his democratic 
activities. The University of Oxford defended him against the bishops as long as possible. When 
the House of Lords condemned his itinerant preachers, the House of Commons refused to concur. 
No doubt trouble would have accumulated if he had lived longer, but when he died in 1384 he had 
not yet been formally condemned. He was buried at Lutterworth, where he died, and his bones 
were left in peace until the Council of Constance had them dug up and burnt. 

His followers in England, the Lollards, were severely persecuted and practically stamped out. But 
owing to the fact that Richard II’s wife was a Bohemian, his doctrines became known in Bohemia, 
where Huss was his disciple; and in Bohemia, in spite of persecution, they survived until the 
Refonnation. In England, although driven underground, the revolt against the papacy remained in 
men's thoughts, and prepared the soil for Protestantism. 

During the fifteenth century, various other causes were added to the decline of the papacy to 
produce a very rapid change, both political and cultural. Gunpowder strengthened central 
governments at the expense of the feudal nobility. In France and England, Louis XI and Edward 
IV allied themselves with the rich middle class, who helped them to quell aristocratic anarchy. 
Italy, until the last years of the century, was fairly free from Northern armies, and advanced 
rapidly both in wealth and culture. The new culture was essentially pagan, admiring Greece and 
Rome, and despising the Middle Ages. Architecture and literary style were adapted to ancient 
models. When Constantinople, the last survival of antiquity, was captured by the Turks, Greek 
refugees in Italy were welcomed by humanists. Vasco da Gama and Columbus enlarged the world, 
and Copernicus enlarged the heavens. The Donation of Constantine was rejected as a fable, and 
overwhelmed with scholarly derision. By the help of the Byzantines, Plato came to be known, not 
only in Neoplatonic and Augustinian versions, but at first hand. This sublunary sphere appeared 
no 


-486- 

longer as a vale of tears, a place of painful pilgrimage to another world, but as affording 
opportunity for pagan delights, for fame and beauty and adventure. The long centuries of 
asceticism were forgotten in a riot of art and poetry and pleasure. Even in Italy, it is true, the 
Middle Ages did not die without a struggle; Savonarola and Leonardo were born in the same year. 
But in the main the old terrors had ceased to be terrifying, and the new liberty of the spirit was 
found intoxicating. The intoxication could not last, but for the moment it shut out fear. In this 
moment of joyful liberation the modern world was born. 

-487- 

[This page intentionally left blank.] 

-488- 

Book Three MODERN PHILOSOPHY 

-489- 


[This page intentionally left blank.] 
-490- 



Part I. From the Renaissance to Hume 


CHAPTER I General Characteristics 

THE period of history which is commonly called "modern" has a mental outlook which differs 
from that of the medieval period in many ways. Of these, two are the most important: the 
diminishing authority of the Church, and the increasing authority of science. With these two, 
others are connected. The culture of modem times is more lay than clerical. States increasingly 
replace the Church as the governmental authority that controls culture. The government of nations 
is, at first, mainly in the hands of kings; then, as in ancient Greece, the kings are gradually 
replaced by democracies or tyrants. The power of the national State, and the functions that it 
performs, grow steadily throughout the whole period (apart from some minor fluctuations); but at 
most times the State has less influence on the opinions of philosophers than the Church had in the 
Middle Ages. The feudal aristocracy, which, north of the Alps, had been able, till the fifteenth 
century, to hold its own against central governments, loses first its political and then its economic 
importance. It is replaced by the king in alliance with rich merchants; these two share power in 
different proportions in different countries. There is a tendency for the rich merchants to become 
absorbed into the aristocracy. From the time of the American and French Revolutions onwards, 
democracy, in the modern sense, becomes an important political force. Socialism, as opposed to 
democracy based on private property, first acquires governmental power in 1917. This form of 

- 491 - 



government, however, if it spreads, must obviously bring with it a new fonn of culture; the culture 
with which we shall be concerned is in the main "liberal," that is to say, of the kind most naturally 
associated with commerce. To this there are important exceptions, especially in Germany; Fichte 
and Hegel, to take two examples, have an outlook which is totally unconnected with commerce. 
But such exceptions are not typical of their age. 

The rejection of ecclesiastical authority, which is the negative characteristic of the modem age, 
begins earlier than the positive characteristic, which is the acceptance of scientific authority. In the 
Italian Renaissance, science played a very small part; the opposition to the Church, in men's 
thoughts, was connected with antiquity, and looked still to the past, but to a more distant past than 
that of the early Church and the Middle Ages. The first serious irruption of science was the 
publication of the Copernican theory in 1543; but this theory did not become influential until it 
was taken up and improved by Kepler and Galileo in the seventeenth century. Then began the long 
fight between science and dogma, in which traditionalists fought a losing battle against new 
knowledge. 

The authority of science, which is recognized by most philosophers of the modem epoch, is a very 
different thing from the authority of the Church, since it is intellectual, not governmental. No 
penalties fall upon those who reject it; no prudential arguments influence those who accept it. It 
prevails solely by its intrinsic appeal to reason. It is, moreover, a piecemeal and partial authority; 
it does not, like the body of Catholic dogma, lay down a complete system, covering human 
morality, human hopes, and the past and future history of the universe. It pronounces only on 
whatever, at the time, appears to have been scientifically ascertained, which is a small island in an 
ocean of nescience. There is yet another difference from ecclesiastical authority, which declares its 
pronouncements to be absolutely certain and eternally unalterable: the pronouncements of science 
are made tentatively, on a basis of probability, and are regarded as liable to modification. This 
produces a temper of mind very different from that of the medieval dogmatist. 

So far, I have been speaking of theoretical science, which is an attempt to understand the world. 
Practical science, which is an attempt to change the world, has been important from the first, and 
has 


- 492 - 



continually increased in importance, until it has almost ousted theoretical science from men's 
thoughts. The practical importance of science was first recognized in connection with war; Galileo 
and Leonardo obtained government employment by their claim to improve artillery and the art of 
fortification. From their time onwards, the part of the men of science in war has steadily grown 
greater. Their part in developing machine production, and accustoming the population to the use, 
first of steam, then of electricity, came later, and did not begin to have important political effects 
until near the end of the eighteenth century. The triumph of science has been mainly due to its 
practical utility, and there has been an attempt to divorce this aspect from that of theory, thus 
making science more and more a technique, and less and less a doctrine as to the nature of the 
world. The penetration of this point of view to the philosophers is very recent. 

Emancipation from the authority of the Church led to the growth of individualism, even to the 
point of anarchy. Discipline, intellectual, moral, and political, was associated in the minds of the 
men of the Renaissance with the scholastic philosophy and ecclesiastical government. The 
Aristotelian logic of the Schoolmen was narrow, but afforded a training in a certain kind of 
accuracy. When this school of logic became unfashionable, it was not, at first, succeeded by 
something better, but only by an eclectic imitation of ancient models. Until the seventeenth 
century, there was nothing of importance in philosophy. The moral and political anarchy of 
fifteenth-century Italy was appalling, and gave rise to the doctrines of Machiavelli. At the same 
time, the freedom from mental shackles led to an astonishing display of genius in art and 
literature. But such a society is unstable. The Refonnation and the Counter-Reformation, 
combined with the subjection of Italy to Spain, put an end to both the good and the bad of the 
Italian Renaissance. When the movement spread north of the Alps, it had not the same anarchic 
character. 

Modern philosophy, however, has retained, for the most part, an individualistic and subjective 
character. This is very marked in Descartes, who builds up all knowledge from the certainty of his 
own existence, and accepts clearness and distinctness (both subjective) as criteria of truth. It is not 
prominent in Spinoza, but reappears in Leibniz's windowless monads. Locke, whose temperament 
is thor- 


- 493 - 



oughly objective, is forced reluctantly into the subjective doctrine that knowledge is of the 
agreement or disagreement of ideas— a view so repulsive to him that he escapes from it by violent 
inconsistencies. Berkeley, after abolishing matter, is only saved from complete subjectivism by a 
use of God which most subsequent philosophers have regarded as illegitimate. In Hume, the 
empiricist philosophy culminated in a scepticism which none could refute and none could accept. 
Kant and Fichte were subjective in temperament as well as in doctrine; Hegel saved himself by 
means of the influence of Spinoza. Rousseau and the romantic movement extended subjectivity 
from theory of knowledge to ethics and politics, and ended, logically, in complete anarchism such 
as that of Bakunin. This extreme of subjectivism is a form of madness. 

Meanwhile science as technique was building up in practical men a quite different outlook from 
any that was to be found among theoretical philosophers. Technique conferred a sense of power: 
man is now much less at the mercy of his environment than he was in former times. But the power 
conferred by technique is social, not individual; an average individual wrecked on a desert island 
could have achieved more in the seventeenth century than he could now. Scientific technique 
requires the co-operation of a large number of individuals organized under a single direction. Its 
tendency, therefore, is against anarchism and even individualism, since it demands a well-knit 
social structure. Unlike religion, it is ethically neutral: it assures men that they can perfonn 
wonders, but does not tell them what wonders to perform. In this way it is incomplete. In practice, 
the purposes to which scientific skill will be devoted depend largely on chance. The men at the 
head of the vast organizations which it necessitates can, within limits, turn it this way or that as 
they please. The power impulse thus has a scope which it never had before. The philosophies that 
have been inspired by scientific technique are power philosophies, and tend to regard everything 
non-human as mere raw material. Ends are no longer considered; only the skilfulness of the 
process is valued. This also is a form of madness. It is, in our day, the most dangerous fonn, and 
the one against which a sane philosophy should provide an antidote. 

The ancient world found an end to anarchy in the Roman Empire, but the Roman Empire was a 
brute fact, not an idea. The Catholic 


- 494 - 



world sought an end to anarchy in the Church, which was an idea, but was never adequately 
embodied in fact. Neither the ancient nor the medieval solution was satisfactory— the one because 
it could not be idealized, the other because it could not be actualized. The modern world, at 
present, seems to be moving towards a solution like that of antiquity: a social order imposed by 
force, representing the will of the powerful rather than the hopes of common men. The problem of 
a durable and satisfactory social order can only be solved by combining the solidity of the Roman 
Empire with the idealism of Saint Augustine's City of God. To achieve this a new philosophy will 
be needed. 


CHAPTER II The Italian Renaissance 

THE modern as opposed to the medieval outlook began in Italy with the movement called the 
Renaissance. At first, only a few individuals, notably Petrarch, had this outlook, but during the 
fifteenth century it spread to the great majority of cultivated Italians, both lay and clerical. In some 
respects, Italians of the Renaissance— with the exception of Leonardo and a few others-had not the 
respect for science which has characterized most important innovators since the seventeenth 
century; with this lack is associated their very partial emancipation from superstition, especially in 
the form of astrology. Many of them had still the reverence for authority that medieval 
philosophers had had, but they substituted the authority of the ancients for that of the Church. This 
was, of course, a step towards emancipation, since the ancients disagreed with each other, and 
individual judgement was required to decide which of them to follow. But very few Italians of the 
fifteenth century would have dared to hold an opinion for which no authority could be found 
either in antiquity or in the teaching of the Church. 

To understand the Renaissance, it is necessary first to review briefly the political condition of 
Italy. After the death of Frederick 


- 495 - 



II in 1250, Italy was, in the main, free from foreign interference until the French king Charles VIII 
invaded the country in 1494. There were in Italy five important States: Milan, Venice, Florence, 
the Papal Domain, and Naples; in addition to these there were a number of small principalities, 
which varied in their alliance with or subjection to some one of the larger States. Until 1378, 
Genoa rivalled Venice in commerce and naval power, but after that year Genoa became subject to 
Milanese suzerainty. 

Milan, which led the resistance to feudalism in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, fell, after the 
final defeat of the Hohenstaufen, under the dominion of the Visconti, an able family whose power 
was plutocratic, not feudal. They ruled for 170 years, from 1277 to 1447; then, after three years of 
restored republican government, a new family, that of the Sforza, connected with the Visconti, 
acquired the government, and took the title of Dukes of Milan. From 1494 to 1535, Milan was a 
battle-ground between the French and the Spaniards; the Sforza allied themselves sometimes with 
one side, sometimes with the other. During this period they were sometimes in exile, sometimes in 
nominal control. Finally, in 1535, Milan was annexed by the Emperor Charles V. 

The Republic of Venice stands somewhat outside Italian politics, especially in the earlier centuries 
of its greatness. It had never been conquered by the barbarians, and at first regarded itself as 
subject to the Eastern emperors. This tradition, combined with the fact that its trade was with the 
East, gave it an independence of Rome, which still persisted down to the time of the Council of 
Trent ( 1545), of which the Venetian Paolo Sarpi wrote a very anti-papal history. We have seen 
how, at the time of the fourth Crusade, Venice insisted upon the conquest of Constantinople. This 
improved Venetian trade, which, conversely, suffered by the Turkish conquest of Constantinople 
in 1453. For various reasons, partly connected with food supply, the Venetians found it necessary, 
during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, to acquire considerable territory on the mainland of 
Italy; this roused enmities, and led finally, in 1509, to the formation of the League of Cambray, a 
combination of powerful States by which Venice was defeated. It might have been possible to 
recover from this misfortune, but not from Vasco da Gama's discovery of the Cape route to India ( 
1497-8). This, added to the power of the Turks, 


- 496 - 



ruined Venice, which, however, lingered on until deprived of independence by Napoleon. 

The constitution of Venice, which had originally been democratic, became gradually less so, and 
was, after 1297, a close oligarchy. The basis of political power was the Great Council, 
membership of which, after that date, was hereditary, and was confined to the leading families. 
Executive power belonged to the Council of Ten, which was elected by the Great Council. The 
Doge, the ceremonial head of the State, was elected for life; his nominal powers were very 
restricted, but in practice his influence was usually decisive. Venetian diplomacy was considered 
exceedingly astute, and the reports of Venetian am. bassadors were remarkably penetrating. Since 
Ranke, historians have used them as among the best sources for knowledge of the events with 
which they deal. 

Florence was the most civilized city in the world, and the chief source of the Renaissance. Almost 
all the great names in literature, and the earlier as well as some of the later of the great names in 
art, are connected with Florence; but for the present we are concerned, with politics rather than 
culture. In the thirteenth century, there were three conflicting classes in Florence: the nobles, the 
rich merchants, and the small men. The nobles, in the main, were Ghibelline, the other two classes 
Guelf. The Ghibellines were finally defeated in 1266, and during the fourteenth century the party 
of the small men got the better of the rich merchants. The conflict, however, led not to a stable 
democracy, but to the gradual growth of what the Greeks would have called a "tyranny." The 
Medici family, who ultimately became, the rulers of Florence, began as political bosses on the 
democratic side. Cosimo dei Medici ( 1389-1464), the first of the family to achieve clear pre- 
eminence, still had no official position; his power depended upon skill in manipulating elections. 
He was astute, conciliatory when possible, ruthless when necessary. He was succeeded, after a 
short interval, by his grandson Forenzo the Magnificent, who held power from 1469 till his death 
in 1492. Both these men owed their position to their wealth, which they had acquired mainly in 
commerce, but also in mining and other industries. They understood how to make Florence rich, 
as well as themselves, and under them the city prospered. 

Forenzo's son Pietro lacked his father's merits, and was expelled 


- 497 - 



in 1494. Then followed the four years of Savonarola's influence, when a kind of Puritan revival 
turned men against gaiety and luxury, away from free-thought and towards the piety supposed to 
have characterized a simpler age. In the end, however, mainly for political reasons, Savonarola's 
enemies triumphed, he was executed and his body was burnt ( 1498). The Republic, democratic in 
intention but plutocratic in fact, survived till 1512, when the Medici were restored. A son of 
Lorenzo, who had become a cardinal at the age of fourteen, was elected Pope in 1513, and took 
the title of Leo X. The Medici family, under the title of Grand Dukes of Tuscany, governed 
Florence until 1737; but Florence meanwhile, like the rest of Italy, had become poor and 
unimportant. 

The temporal power of the Pope, which owed its origin to Pepin and the forged Donation of 
Constantine, increased greatly during the Renaissance; but the methods employed by the popes to 
this end robbed the papacy of spiritual authority. The conciliar movement, which came to grief in 
the conflict between the Council of Basel and Pope Eugenius IV ( 1431-1447), represented the 
most earnest elements in the Church; what was perhaps even more important, it represented 
ecclesiastical opinion north of the Alps. The victory of the popes was the victory of Italy, and (in a 
lesser degree) of Spain. Italian civilization, in the latter half of the fifteenth century, was totally 
unlike that of northern countries, which remained medieval. The Italians were in earnest about 
culture, but not about morals and religion; even in the minds of ecclesiastics, elegant latinity 
would cover a multitude of sins. Nicholas V ( 1447-1455), the first humanist Pope, gave papal 
offices to scholars whose learning he respected, regardless of other considerations; Lorenzo Valla, 
an Epicurean, and the man who proved the Donation of Constantine to be a forgery, who ridiculed 
the style of the Vulgate and accused Saint Augustine of heresy, was made apostolic secretary. This 
policy of encouraging humanism rather than piety or orthdoxy continued until the sack of Rome in 
1527. 

Encouragement of humanism, though it shocked the earnest North, might, from our point of view, 
be reckoned a virtue; but the warlike policy and immoral life of some of the popes could not be 
defended from any point of view except that of naked power politics. Alexander VI ( 1492-1503) 
devoted his life as Pope to the aggrandizement 


- 498 - 



of himself and his family. He had two sons, the Duke of Gandia and Caesar Borgia, of whom he 
greatly preferred the former. The duke, however, was murdered, probably by his brother; the 
Pope's dynastic ambitions therefore had to be concentrated on Caesar. Together they conquered 
the Romagna and Ancona, which were intended to form a principality for Caesar; but when the 
Pope died Caesar was very ill, and therefore could not act promptly. Their conquests consequently 
reverted to the patrimony of Saint Peter. The wickedness of these two men soon became 
legendary, and it is difficult to disentangle truth from falsehood as regards the innumerable 
murders of which they are accused. There can be no doubt, however, that they carried the arts of 
perfidy further than they had ever been carried before. Julius II ( 1503-1513), who succeeded 
Alexander VI, was not remarkable for piety, but gave less occasion for scandal than his 
predecessor. He continued the process of enlarging the papal domain; as a soldier he had merit, 
but not as the Head of the Christian Church. The Reformation, which began under his successor 
Leo X ( 15131521), was the natural outcome of the pagan policy of the Renaissance popes. 

The southern extremity of Italy was occupied by the Kingdom of Naples, with which, at most 
times, Sicily was united. Naples and Sicily had been the especial personal kingdom of the 
Emperor Frederick II; he had introduced an absolute monarchy on the Mohaimnedan model, 
enlightened but despotic, and allowing no power to the feudal nobility. After his death in 1250, 
Naples and Sicily went to his natural son Manfred, who, however, inherited the implacable 
hostility of the Church, and was ousted by the French in 1266. The French made themselves 
unpopular, and were massacred in the "Sicilian Vespers" ( 1282), after which the kingdom 
belonged to Peter III of Aragon and his heirs. After various complications, leading to the 
temporary separation of Naples and Sicily, they were reunited in 1443 under Alphonso the 
Magnanimous, a distinguished patron of letters. From 1495 onwards, three French kings tried to 
conquer Naples, but in the end the kingdom was acquired by Ferdinand of Aragon ( 1502). 

Charles VIII, Louis XII, and Francis I, kings of France, all had claims (not very good in law) on 
Milan and Naples; all invaded Italy with temporary success, but all were ultimately defeated by 
the Spaniards. The victory of Spain and the Counter- 


- 499 - 



Reformation put an end to the Italian Renaissance. Pope Clement VII being an obstacle to the 
Counter-Reformation, and, as a Medici, a friend of France, Charles V, in 1527, caused Rome to be 
sacked by a largely Protestant army. After this, the popes became religious, and the Italian 
Renaissance was at an end. 

The game of power politics in Italy was unbelievably complex. The minor princes, mostly self- 
made tyrants, allied themselves now with one of the larger States, now with another; if they played 
the game unwisely, they were extenninated. There were constant wars, but until the coming of the 
French in 1494 they were almost bloodless: the soldiers were mercenaries, who were anxious to 
minimize their vocational risks. These purely Italian wars did not interfere much with trade, or 
prevent the country from increasing in wealth. There was much statecraft, but no wise 
statesmanship; when the French came, the country found itself practically defenceless. French 
troops shocked the Italians by actually killing people in battle. The wars between French and 
Spaniards which ensued were serious wars, bringing suffering and impoverishment. But the Italian 
states went on intriguing against each other, invoking the aid of France or Spain in their internal 
quarrels, without any feeling for national unity. In the end, all were ruined. It must be said that 
Italy would inevitably have lost its importance, owing to the discovery of America and the Cape 
route to the East; but the collapse could have been less catastrophic, and less destructive of the 
quality of Italian civilization. 

The Renaissance was not a period of great achievement in philosophy, but it did certain things 
which were essential preliminaries to the greatness of the seventeenth century. In the first place, it 
broke down the rigid scholastic system, which had become an intellectual strait jacket. It revived 
the study of Plato, and thereby demanded at least so much independent thought as was required 
for choosing between him and Aristotle. In regard to both, it promoted a genuine and first-hand 
knowledge, free from the glosses of Neoplatonists and Arabic commentators. More important still, 
it encouraged the habit of regarding intellectual activity as a delightful social adventure, not a 
cloistered meditation aiming at the preservation of a predetermined orthodoxy. 

The substitution of Plato for the scholastic Aristotle was hastened 


- 500 - 



by contact with Byzantine scholarship. Already at the Council of Ferrara ( 1438), which nominally 
reunited the Eastern and Western Churches, there was a debate in which the Byzantines 
maintained the superiority of Plato to Aristotle. Gemistus Pletho, an ardent Greek Platonist of 
doubtful orthodoxy, did much to promote Platonism in Italy; so did Bessarion, a Greek who 
became a cardinal. Cosimo and Lorenzo dei Medici were both addicted to Plato; Cosimo founded 
and Lorenzo continued the Florentine Academy, which was largely devoted to the study of Plato. 
Cosimo died listening to one of Plato's dialogues. The humanists of the time, however, were too 
busy acquiring knowledge of antiquity to be able to produce anything original in philosophy. 

The Renaissance was not a popular movement; it was a movement of a small number of scholars 
and artists, encouraged by liberal patrons, especially the Medici and the humanist popes. But for 
these patrons, it might have had very much less success. Petrarch and Boccaccio, in the fourteenth 
century, belong mentally to the Renaissance, but owing to the different political conditions of their 
time their immediate influence was less than that of the fifteenth-century humanists. 

The attitude of Renaissance scholars to the Church is difficult to characterize simply. Some were 
avowed free-thinkers, though even these usually received extreme unction, making peace with the 
Church when they felt death approaching. Most of them were impressed by the wickedness of 
contemporary popes, but were nevertheless glad to be employed by them. Guicciardini the 
historian wrote in 1529: 

"No man is more disgusted than I am with the ambition, the avarice, and the profligacy of the 
priests, not only because each of these vices is hateful in itself, but because each and all of them 
are most unbecoming in those who declare themselves to be men in special relations with God, 
and also because they are vices so opposed to one another, that they can only co-exist in very 
singular natures. Nevertheless, my position at the Court of several popes forced me to desire their 
greatness for the sake of my own interest. But, had it not been for this, I should have loved Martin 
Luther as myself, not in order to free myself from the laws which Christianity, as generally 
understood and explained, lays upon us, but in order to see this swarm of scoun- 


- 501 - 



drels put back into their proper place, so that they may be forced to live either without vices or 
without power." 

This is delightfully frank, and shows clearly why the humanists could not inaugurate a 
reformation. Moreover, most of them saw no half-way house between orthodoxy and free- 
thought; such a position as Luther's was impossible for them, because they no longer had the 
medieval feeling for the subtleties of theology. Masuccio, after describing the wickedness of 
monks and nuns and friars, says: "The best punishment for them would be for God to abolish 
purgatory; they would then receive no more alms, and would be forced to go back to their 

spades." —But it does not occur to him, as to Luther, to deny purgatory, while retaining most 
of the Catholic faith. 

The wealth of Rome depended only in small part upon the revenues obtained from the papal 
dominions; in the main, it was a tribute, drawn from the whole Catholic world, by means of a 
theological system which maintained that the popes held the keys of heaven. An Italian who 
effectively questioned this system risked the impoverishment of Italy, and the loss of the 
position of Rome in the Western world. Consequently Italian unorthodoxy, in the Renaissance, 
was purely intellectual, and did not lead to schism, or to any attempt to create a popular 
movement away from the Church. The only exception, and that a very partial one, was 
Savonarola, who belonged mentally to the Middle Ages. 

Most of the humanists retained such superstitious beliefs as had found support in antiquity. 
Magic and witchcraft might be wicked, but were not thought impossible. Innocent VIII, in 
1484, issued a bull against witchcraft, which led to an appalling persecution of witches in 
Gennany and elsewhere. Astrology was prized especially by freethinkers; it acquired a vogue 
which it had not had since ancient times. The first effect of emancipation from the Church was 
not to make men think rationally, but to open their minds to every sort of antique nonsense. 

Morally, the first effect of emancipation was equally disastrous. The old moral rules ceased to 
be respected; most of the rulers of States had acquired their position by treachery, and retained 
it by ruthless cruelty. When cardinals were invited to dine at the coronation of a 


* Quoted from Burckhardt, Renaissance in Italy, Part VI, Ch. II. 


a 

g Ibid. 


- 502 - 


pope, they brought their own wine and their own cup-bearer, for fear of poison. ^Except 
Savonarola, hardly any Italian of the period risked anything for a public object. The evils of 
papal corruption were obvious, but nothing was done about them. The desirability of Italian 
unity was evident, but the rulers were incapable of combination. The danger of foreign 
domination was imminent, yet every Italian ruler was prepared to invoke the aid of any foreign 
power, even the Turk, in any dispute with any other Italian ruler. I cannot think of any crime, 
except the destruction of ancient manuscripts, of which the men of the Renaissance were not 
frequently guilty. 

Outside the sphere of morals, the Renaissance had great merits. In architecture, painting, and 
poetry, it has remained renowned. It produced very great men, such as Leonardo, Michelangelo, 
and Machiavelli. It liberated educated men from the narrowness of medieval culture, and, even 
while still a slave to the worship of antiquity, it made scholars aware that a variety of opinions 
had been held by reputable authorities on almost every subject. By reviving the knowledge of 
the Greek world, it created a mental atmosphere in which it was again possible to rival Hellenic 
achievements, and in which individual genius could flourish with a freedom unknown since the 
time of Alexander. The political conditions of the Renaissance favoured individual 
development, but were unstable; the instability and the individualism were closely connected, 
as in ancient Greece. A stable social system is necessary, but every stable system hitherto 
devised has hampered the development of exceptional artistic or intellectual merit. How much 
murder and anarchy are we prepared to endure for the sake of great achievements such as those 
of the Renaissance? In the past, a great deal; in our own time, much less. No solution of this 
problem has hitherto been found, although increase of social organization is making it 
continually more important. 


* Burckhardt, op. cit., Part VI, Ch. I. 


- 503 - 


CHAPTER III Machiavelli 


T HE Renaissance, though it produced no important theoretical philosopher, produced one man of 
supreme eminence in political philosophy, NiccolA 2 Machiavelli. It is the custom to be shocked 
by him, and he certainly is sometimes shocking. But many other men would be equally so if they 
were equally free from humbug. His political philosophy is scientific and empirical, based upon 
his own experience of affairs, concerned to set forth the means to assigned ends, regardless of the 
question whether the ends are to be considered good or bad. When, on occasion, he allows himself 
to mention the ends that he desires, they are such as we can all applaud. Much of the conventional 
obloquy that attaches to his name is due to the indignation of hypocrites who hate the frank 
avowal of evil-doing. There remains, it is true, a good deal that genuinely demands criticism, but 
in this he is an expression of his age. Such intellectual honesty about political dishonesty would 
have been hardly possible at any other time or in any other country, except perhaps in Greece 
among men who owed their theoretical education to the sophists and their practical training to the 
wars of petty states which, in classical Greece as in Renaissance Italy, were the political 
accompaniment of individual genius. 

Machiavelli ( 1467-1527) was a Florentine, whose father, a lawyer, was neither rich nor poor. 
When he was in his twenties, Savonarola dominated Florence; his miserable end evidently made a 
great impression on Machiavelli, for he remarks that "all armed prophets have conquered and 
unanned ones failed," proceeding to give Savonarola as an instance of the latter class. On the 
other side he mentions Moses, Cyrus, Theseus, and Romulus. It is typical of the Renaissance that 
Christ is not mentioned. 

Immediately after Savonarola's execution. Machiavelli obtained a 

- 504 - 



minor post in the Florentine government ( 1498). He remained in its service, at times on important 
diplomatic missions, until the restoration of the Medici in 1512; then, having always opposed 
them, he was arrested, but acquitted, and allowed to live in retirement in the country near 
Florence. He became an author for want of other occupation. His most famous work, The Prince, 
was written in 1513, and dedicated to Lorenzo the Magnificent, since he hoped (vainly, as it 
proved) to win the favour of the Medici. Its tone is perhaps partly due to this practical purpose; his 
longer work, the Discourses, which he was writing at the same time, is markedly more republican 
and more liberal. He says at the beginning of The Prince that he will not speak of republics in this 
book, since he has dealt with them elsewhere. Those who do not read also the Discourses are 
likely to get a very one-sided view of his doctrine. 

Having failed to conciliate the Medici, Machiavelli was compelled to go on writing. He lived in 
retirement until the year of his death, which was that of the sack of Rome by the troops of Charles 
V. This year may be reckoned also that in which the Italian Renaissance died. 

The Prince is concerned to discover, from history and from contemporary events, how 
principalities are won, how they are held, and how they are lost. Fifteenth-century Italy afforded a 
multitude of examples, both great and small. Few rulers were legitimate; even the popes, in many 
cases, secured election by corrupt means. The rules for achieving success were not quite the same 
as they became when times grew more settled, for no one was shocked by cruelties and treacheries 
which would have disqualified a man in the eighteenth or the nineteenth century. Perhaps our age, 
again, can better appreciate Machiavelli, for some of the most notable successes of our time have 
been achieved by methods as base as any employed in Renaissance Italy. He would have 
applauded, as an artistic connoisseur in statecraft, Hitler's Reichstag fire, his purge of the party in 
1934, and his breach of faith after Munich. 

Caesar Borgia, son of Alexander VI, comes in for high praise. His problem was a difficult one: 
first, by the death of his brother, to become the sole beneficiary of his father's dynastic ambition; 
second, to conquer by force of arms, in the name of the Pope, territories which should, after 
Alexander's death, belong to himself and not to the Papal States; third, to manipulate the College 
of Cardinals so that the next 


- 505 - 



Pope should be his friend. He pursued this difficult end with great skill; from his practice, 
Machiavelli says, a new prince should derive precepts. Caesar failed, it is true, but only "by the 
extraordinary malignity of fortune." It happened that, when his father died, he also was 
dangerously ill; by the time he recovered, his enemies had organized their forces, and his bitterest 
opponent had been elected Pope. On the day of this election, Caesar told Machiavelli that he had 
provided for everything, "except that he had never thought that at his father's death he would be 
dying himself." 

Machiavelli, who was intimately acquainted with his villainies, sums up thus: "Reviewing thus all 
the actions of the duke [ Caesar], I find nothing to blame, on the contrary, I feel bound, as I have 
done, to hold him as an example to be imitated by all who by fortune and with the arms of others 
have risen to power." 

There is an interesting chapter "Of Ecclesiastical Principalities," which, in view of what is said in 
the Discourses, evidently conceals part of Machiavelli's thought. The reason for concealment was, 
no doubt, that The Prince was designed to please the Medici, and that, when it was written, a 
Medici had just become Pope ( Leo X). In regard to ecclesiastical principalities, he says in The 
Prince, the only difficulty is to acquire them, for, when acquired, they are defended by ancient 
religious customs, which keep their princes in power no matter how they behave. Their princes do 
not need armies (so he says), because "they are upheld by higher causes, which the human mind 
cannot attain to." They are "exalted and maintained by God," and "it would be the work of a 
presumptuous and foolish man to discuss them." Nevertheless, he continues, it is pennissible to 
inquire by what means Alexander VI so greatly increased the temporal power of the Pope. 

The discussion of the papal powers in the Discourses is longer and more sincere. Here he begins 
by placing eminent men in an ethical hierarchy. The best, he says, are the founders of religions; 
then come the founders of monarchies or republics; then literary men. These are good, but 
destroyers of religions, subverters of republics or kingdoms, and enemies of virtue or of letters, 
are bad. Those who establish tyrannies are wicked, including Julius Caesar; on the other hand, 
Brutus was good. (The contrast between this view and Dante's shows the effect of classical 
literature.) He holds that religion should have a 


- 506 - 



prominent place in the State, not on the ground of its truth, but as a social cement: the Romans 
were right to pretend to believe in auguries, and to punish those who disregarded them. His 
criticisms of the Church in his day are two: that by its evil conduct it has undermined religious 
belief, and that the temporal power of the popes, with the policy that it inspires, prevents the 
unification of Italy. These criticisms are expressed with great vigour. "The nearer people are to 
the Church of Rome, which is the head of our religion, the less religious are they. . . . Her ruin 
and chastisement is near at hand. ... We Italians owe to the Church of Rome and to her priests 
our having become irreligious and bad; but we owe her a still greater debt, and one that will be 
the cause of our ruin, namely that the Church has kept and still keeps our country divided." 

In view of such passages, it must be supposed that Machiavelli's admiration of Caesar Borgia 
was only for his skill, not for his purposes. Admiration of skill, and of the actions that lead to 
fame, was very great at the time of the Renaissance. This kind of feeling has, of course, always 
existed; many of Napoleon’s enemies enthusiastically admired him as a military strategist. But 
in the Italy of Machiavelli's time the quasi-artistic admiration of dexterity was much greater 
than in earlier or later centuries. It would be a mistake to try to reconcile it with the larger 
political aims which Machiavelli considered important; the two things, love of skill and 
patriotic desire for Italian unity, existed side by side in his mind, and were not in any degree 
synthesized. Thus he can praise Caesar Borgia for his cleverness, and blame him for keeping 
Italy disrupted. The perfect character, one must suppose, would be, in his opinion, a man as 
clever and unscrupulous as Caesar Borgia where means are concerned, but aiming at a different 
end. The Prince ends with an eloquent appeal to the Medici to liberate Italy from the 
"barbarians" (i.e., the French and Spaniards), whose domination "sti nk s." He would not expect 
such a work to be undertaken from unselfish motives, but from love of power, and still more of 
fame. 

The Prince is very explicit in repudiating received morality where the conduct of rulers is 
concerned. A ruler will perish if he is always good; he must be as cunning as a fox and as fierce 
as a lion. There is 


* This remained true until 1870. 


- 507 - 


a chapter (XVIIII) entitled: "In What Way Princes Must Keep Faith. " We learn that they should 
keep faith when it pays to do so, but not otherwise. A prince must on occasion be faithless. 

"But it is necessary to be able to disguise this character well, and to be a great feigner and 
dissembler; and men are so simple and so ready to obey present necessities, that one who deceives 
will always find those who allow themselves to be deceived. I will mention only One modem 
instance. Alexander VI did nothing else but deceive men, he thought of nothing else, and found 
the occasion for it; no man was ever more able to give assurances, or affirmed things with stronger 
oaths, and no man observed them less; however, he always succeeded in his deceptions, as he 
knew well this aspect of things. It is not necessary therefore for a prince to have all the above- 
named qualities [the conventional virtues], but it is very necessary to seem to have them." 

He goes on to say that, above all, a prince should seem to be religious. 

The tone of the Discourses, which are nominally a commentary on Livy, is very different. There 
are whole chapters which seem almost as if they had been written by Montesquieu; most of the 
book could have been read with approval by an eighteenth-century liberal. The doctrine of checks 
and balances is set forth explicitly. Princes, nobles, and people should all have a part in the 
Constitution; "then these three powers will keep each other reciprocally in check." The 
constitution of Sparta, as established by Lycurgus, was the best, because it embodied the most 
perfect balance; that of Solon was too democratic, and therefore led to the tyranny of Peisistratus, 
The Roman republican constitution was good, owing to the conflict of Senate and people. 

The word "liberty" is used throughout as denoting something precious, though what it denotes is 
not very clear. This, of course, comes from antiquity, and was passed on to the eighteenth and 
nineteenth centuries. Tuscany has preserved its liberties, because it contains no castles or 
gentlemen. ("Gentlemen" is of course a mistranslation, but a pleasing one.) It seems to be 
recognized that political liberty requires a certain kind of personal virtue in the citizens. In 
Germany alone, we are told, probity and religion are still common and therefore in Gennany there 
are many republics. In general, the. people are wiser and more constant than princes, although 
Livy and 


- 508 - 



most other writers maintain the opposite. It is not without good reason that it is said, "The voice of 
the people is the voice of God." 

It is interesting to observe how the political thought of the Greeks and Romans, in their republican 
days, acquired an actuality in the fifteenth century which it had not had in Greece since Alexander 
or in Rome since Augustus. The Neoplatonists, the Arabs, and the Schoolmen took a passionate 
interest in the metaphysics of Plato and Aristotle, but none at all in their political writings, 
because the political systems of the age of City States had completely disappeared. The growth of 
City States in Italy synchronized with the revival of learning, and made it possible for humanists 
to profit by the political theories of republican Greeks and Romans. The love of "liberty," and the 
theory of checks and balances, came to the Renaissance from antiquity, and to modem times 
largely from the Renaissance, though also directly from antiquity. This aspect of Machiavelli is at 
least as important as the more famous "immoral" doctrines of The Prince. 

It is to be noted that Machiavelli never bases any political argument on Christian or biblical 
grounds. Medieval writers had a conception of "legitimate" power, which was that of the Pope and 
the Emperor, or derived from them. Northern writers, even so late as Locke, argue as to what 
happened in the Garden of Eden, and think that they can thence derive proofs that certain kinds of 
power are "legitimate." In Machiavelli there is no such conception. Power is for those who have 
the skill to seize it in a free competition. His preference for popular government is not derived 
from any idea of "rights," but from the observation that popular governments are less cruel, 
unscrupulous, and inconstant than tyrannies. 

Let us try to make a synthesis (which Machiavelli himself did not make) of the "moral" and 
"immoral" parts of his doctrine. In what follows, I am expressing not my own opinions, but 
opinions which are explicitly or implicitly his. 

There are certain political goods, of which three are specially important: national independence, 
security, and a well-ordered constitution. The best constitution is one which apportions legal 
rights among prince, nobles, and people in proportion to their real power, for under such a 
constitution successful revolutions are difficult and therefore stability is possible; but for 
considerations of stability, it would be wise to give more power to the people. So far as regards 
ends. 


- 509 - 



But there is also, in politics, the question of means. It is futile to pursue a political purpose by 
methods that are bound to fail; if the end is held good, we must choose means adequate to its 
achievement. The question of means can be treated in a purely scientific manner, without regard to 
the goodness or badness of the ends. "Success" means the achievement of your purpose, whatever 
it may be. If there is a science of success, it can be studied just as well in the successes of the 
wicked as in those of the good— indeed better, since the examples of successful sinners are more 
numerous than those of successful saints. But the science, once established, will be just as useful 
to the saint as to the sinner. For the saint, if he concerns himself with politics, must wish, just as 
the sinner does, to achieve success. 

The question is ultimately one of power. To achieve a political end, power, of one kind or another, 
is necessary. This plain fact is concealed by slogans, such as "right will prevail" or "the triumph of 
evil is short-lived." If the side that you think right prevails, that is because it has superior power. It 
is true that power, often, depends upon opinion, and opinion upon propaganda; it is true, also, that 
it is an advantage in propaganda to seem more virtuous than your adversary, and that one way of 
seeming virtuous is to be virtuous. For this reason, it may sometimes happen that victory goes to 
the side which has the most of what the general public considers to be virtue. We must concede to 
Machiavelli that this was an important element in the growing power of the Church during the 
eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries, as well as in the success of the Refonnation in the 
sixteenth century. But there are important limitations. In the first place, those who have seized 
power can, by controlling propaganda, cause their party to appear virtuous; no one, for example, 
could mention the sins of Alexander VI in a New York or Boston public school. In the second 
place, there are chaotic periods during which obvious knavery frequently succeeds; the period of 
Machiavelli was one of them. In such times, there tends to be a rapidly growing cynicism, which 
makes men forgive anything provided it pays. Even in such times, as Machiavelli himself says, it 
is desirable to present an appearance of virtue before the ignorant public. 

This question can be carried a step further. Machiavelli is of opinion that civilized men are almost 
certain to be unscrupulous egoists. If a man wished nowadays to establish a republic, he says, he 
would find 


- 510 - 



it easier with mountaineers than with the men of a large city, since the latter would be already 
corrupted. f_If a man is an unscrupulous egoist, his wisest line of conduct will depend upon the 
population with which he has to operate. The Renaissance Church shocked everybody, but it 
was only north of the Alps that it shocked people enough to produce the Reformation. At the 
time when Luther began his revolt, the revenue of the papacy was probably larger than it would 
have been if Alexander VI and Julius II had been more virtuous, and if this is true, it is so 
because of the cynicism of Renaissance Italy. It follows that politicians will behave better when 
they depend upon a virtuous population than when they depend upon one which is indifferent to 
moral considerations; they will also behave better in a community in which their crimes, if any, 
can be made widely known, than in one in which there is a strict censorship under their control. 
A certain amount can, of course, always be achieved by hypocrisy, but the amount can be much 
diminished by suitable institutions. 

Machiavelli's political thinking, like that of most of the ancients, is in one respect somewhat 
shallow. He is occupied with great law givers, such as Lycurgus and Solon, who are supposed 
to create a community all in one piece, with little regard to what has gone before. The 
conception of a community as an organic growth, which the statesmen can only affect to a 
limited extent, is in the main modem, and has been greatly strengthened by the theory of 
evolution. This conception is not to be found in Machiavelli any more than in Plato. 

It might, however, be maintained that the evolutionary view of society, though true in the past, 
is no longer applicable, but must, for the present and the future, be replaced by a much more 
mechanistic view. In Russia and Germany new societies have been created, in much the same 
way as the mythical Lycurgus was supposed to have created the Spartan polity. The ancient law 
giver was a benevolent myth; the modem law giver is a terrifying reality. The world has become 
more like that of Machiavelli than it was, and the modern man who hopes to refute his 
philosophy must think more deeply than seemed necessary in the nineteenth century. 


* It is curious to find this anticipation of Rousseau. It would be amusing, and not wholly 
false, to interpret Machiavelli as a disappointed romantic. 


- 511 - 


CHAPTER IV Erasmus and More 


IN northern countries the Renaissance began later than in Italy, and soon became entangled with 
the Reformation. But there was a brief period, at the beginning of the sixteenth century, during 
which the new learning was being vigorously disseminated in France, England, and Germany, 
without having become involved in theological controversy. This northern Renaissance was in 
many ways very different from that of Italy. It was not anarchic or amoral; on the contrary, it was 
associated with piety and public virtue. It was much interested in applying standards of 
scholarship to the Bible, and in obtaining a more accurate text than that of the Vulgate. It was less 
brilliant and more solid than its Italian progenitor, less concerned with personal display of 
learning, and more anxious to spread learning as widely as possible. 

Two men, Erasmus and Sir Thomas More, will serve as exemplars of the northern Renaissance. 
They were close friends, and had much in common. Both were learned, though More less so than 
Erasmus; both despised the scholastic philosophy; both aimed at ecclesiastical reform from 
within, but deplored the Protestant schism when it came; both were witty, humourous, and highly 
skilled writers. Before Luther's revolt, they were leaders of thought, but after it the world was too 
violent, on both sides, for men of their type. More suffered martyrdom, and Erasmus sank into 
ineffectiveness. 

Neither Erasmus nor More was a philosopher in the strict sense of the word. My reason for 
speaking of them is that they illustrate the temper of a pre-revolutionary age, when there is a 
widespread demand for moderate reform, and timid men have not yet been frightened into reaction 
by extremists. They exemplify also the dislike of everything systematic in theology or philosophy 
which characterized the reaction against scholasticism. 

- 512 - 



Erasmus ( 1466-1536) was born at Rotterdam. MTe was illegitimate, and invented a 
romantically untrue account of the circumstances of his birth. In fact, his father was a priest, a 
man of some learning, with a knowledge of Greek. His parents died before he was grown up, 
and his guardians (apparently because they had embezzled his money) cajoled him into 
becoming a monk at the monastery of Steyr, a step which he regretted all the rest of his life. 
One of his guardians was a school-master, but knew less Latin than Erasmus already knew as a 
school-boy; in reply to a Latin epistle from the boy, the school-master wrote: "If you should 
write again so elegantly, please to add a commentary." 

In 1493, he became secretary to the bishop of Cambrai, who was Chancellor of the Order of the 
Golden Fleece. This gave him the opportunity to leave the monastery and travel, though not to 
Italy, as he had hoped. His knowledge of Greek was as yet very slight, but he was a highly 
accomplished Latinist; he particularly admired Lorenzo Valla, on account of his book on the 
elegancies of the Latin language. He considered latinity quite compatible with true devotion, 
and instanced Augustine and Jerome— forgetting, apparently, the dream in which Our Lord 
denounced the latter for reading Cicero. 

He was for a time at the University of Paris, but found nothing there that was of profit to 
himself. The university had had its great days, from the beginning of scholasticism to Gerson 
and the conciliar movement, but now the old disputes had become arid. Thomists and Scotists, 
who jointly were called the Ancients, disputed against Occamists, who were called the 
Terminists, or Moderns. At last, in 1482, they were reconciled, and made common cause 
against the humanists, who were making headway in Paris outside university circles. Erasmus 
hated the scholastics, whom he regarded as superannuated and antiquated. He mentioned in a 
letter that, as he wanted to obtain the doctor's degree, he tried to say nothing either graceful or 
witty. He did not really like any philosophy, not even Plato and Aristotle, though they, being 
ancients, had to be spoken of with respect. 

In 1499 he made his first visit to England, where he liked the fashion of kissing girls. In 
England he made friends with Colet and More, who encouraged him to undertake serious work 
rather than 


* As regards the life of Erasmus, I have mainly followed the excellent biography by 
Huizinga. 


- 513 - 


literary trifles. Colet lectured on the Bible without knowing Greek; Erasmus, feeling that he would 
like to do work on the Bible, considered that a knowledge of Greek was essential. After leaving 
England at the beginning of 1500, he set to work to learn Greek, though he was too poor to afford 
a teacher; by the autumn of 1502, he was proficient, and when in 1506 he went to Italy, he found 
that the Italians had nothing to teach him. He determined to edit Saint Jerome, and to bring out a 
Greek Testament with a new Latin translation; both were achieved in 1516. The discovery of 
inaccuracies in the Vulgate was subsequently of use to the Protestants in controversy. He tried to 
leam Hebrew, but gave it up. 

The only book by Erasmus that is still read is The Praise of Folly. The conception of this book 
came to him in 1509, while he was crossing the Alps on the way from Italy to England. He wrote 
it quickly in London, at the house of Sir Thomas More, to whom it is dedicated, with a playful 
suggestion of appropriateness since "moros" means "fool." The book is spoken by Folly in her 
own person; she sings her own praises with great gusto, and her text is enlivened still further with 
illustrations by Holbein. She covers all parts of human life, and all classes and professions. But for 
her, the human race would die out, for who can marry without folly? She counsels, as an antidote 
to wisdom, "taking a wife, a creature so hannless and silly, and yet so useful and convenient, as 
might mollify and make pliable the stiffness and morose humour of men." Who can be happy 
without flattery or without selflove? Yet such happiness is folly. The happiest men are those who 
are nearest the brutes and divest themselves of reason. The best happiness is that which is based 
on delusion, since it costs least: it is easier to imagine oneself a king than to make oneself a king 
in reality. Erasmus proceeds to make fun of national pride and of professional conceit: almost all 
professors of the arts and sciences are egregiously conceited, and derive their happiness from their 
conceit. 

There are passages where the satire gives way to invective, and Folly utters the serious opinions of 
Erasmus; these are concerned with ecclesiastical abuses. Pardons and indulgences, by which 
priests "compute the time of each soul's residence in purgatory"; the worship of saints, even of the 
Virgin, "whose blind devotees think it manners to place the mother before the Son"; the disputes 
of theologians as to the Trinity and the Incarnation; the doctrine of transubstantiation; the 


- 514 - 



scholastic sects; popes, cardinals, and bishops— all are fiercely ridiculed. Particularly fierce is the 
attack on the monastic orders: they are "brainsick fools," who have very little religion in them, yet 
are "highly in love with themselves, and fond admirers of their own happiness." They behave as if 
all religion consisted in minute punctilio: "The precise number of knots to the tying on of their 
sandals; what distinct colours their respective habits, and what stuff made of; how broad and long 
their girdles," and so on. "It will be pretty to hear their pleas before the great tribunal: one will 
brag how he mortified his carnal appetite by feeding only upon fish: another will urge that he 
spent most of his time on earth in the divine exercise of singing psalms: . . . another, that in 
threescore years he never so much as touched a piece of money, except he fingered it though a 
thick pair of gloves." But Christ will interrupt: "Woe unto you, scribes and pharisees, ... I left you 
but one precept, of loving one another, which I do not hear any one plead that he has faithfully 
discharged." Yet on earth these men are feared, for they know many secrets from the confessional, 
and often blab them when they are drunk. 

Popes are not spared. They should imitate their Master by humility and poverty. "Their only 
weapons ought to be those of the Spirit; and of these indeed they are mightly liberal, as of their 
interdicts, their suspensions, their denunciations, their aggravations, their greater and lesser 
excommunications, and their roaring bulls, that fight whomever they are thundered against; and 
these most holy fathers never issue them out more frequently than against those, who, at the 
instigation of the devil, and not having the fear of God before their eyes, do feloniously and 
maliciously attempt to lessen and impair Saint Peter's patrimony." 

It might be supposed, from such passages, that Erasmus would have welcomed the Reformation, 
but it proved otherwise. 

The book ends with the serious suggestion that true religion is a form of Folly. There are, 
throughout, two kinds of Folly, one praised ironically, the other seriously; the kind praised 
seriously is that which is displayed in Christian simplicity. This praise is of a piece with Erasmus's 
dislike of scholastic philosophy and of learned doctors whose Eatin was unclassical. But it has 
also a deeper aspect. It is the first appearance in literature, so far as I know, of the view set forth in 
Rousseau Savoyard Vicar, according to which true religion comes 


- 515 - 



from the heart, not the head, and all elaborate theology is superfluous. This point of view has 
become increasingly common, and is now pretty generally accepted among Protestants. It is, 
essentially, a rejection of Hellenic intellectualism by the sentimentalism of the North. 

Erasmus on his second visit to England, remained for five years ( 1509-14), partly in London, 
partly at Cambridge. He had a considerable influence in stimulating English humanism. The 
education at English public schools remained, until recently, almost exactly what he would have 
wished: a thorough grounding in Greek and Latin, involving not only translation, but verse and 
prose composition. Science, although intellectually dominant since the seventeenth century, was 
thought unworthy the attention of a gentleman or a divine; Plato should be studied, but not the 
subjects which Plato thought worth studying. All this is in line with the influence of Erasmus. 

The men of the Renaissance had an immense curiosity; "these minds," says Huizinga, "never had 
their desired share of striking incidents, curious details, rarities and anomalies." But at first they 
sought these things, not in the world, but in old books. Erasmus was interested in the world, but 
could not digest it in the raw: it had to be dished up in Latin or Greek before he could assimilate 
it. Travellers' tales were discounted, but any marvel in Pliny was believed. Gradually, however, 
curiosity became transferred from books to the real world; men became interested in the savages 
and strange animals that were actually discovered, rather than in those described by classical 
authors. Caliban comes from Montaigne, and Montaigne's cannibals come from travellers. "The 
anthropophagi and men whose heads do grow beneath their shoulders" had been seen by Othello, 
not derived from antiquity. 

And so the curiosity of the Renaissance, from having been literary, gradually became scientific. 
Such a cataract of new facts overwhelmed men that they could, at first, only be swept along with 
the current. The old systems were evidently wrong; Aristotle's physics and Ptolemy's astronomy 
and Galen's medicine could not be stretched to include the discoveries that had been made. 
Montaigne and Shakespeare are content with confusion: discovery is delightful, and system is its 
enemy. It was not till the seventeenth century that the systembuilding faculty caught up with the 
new knowledge of matters of 


- 516 - 



fact. All this, however, has taken us far from Erasmus, to whom Columbus was less interesting 
than the Argonauts. 

Erasmus was incurably and unashamedly literary. He wrote a book, Enchiridion militis christiani, 
giving advice to illiterate soldiers: they were to read the Bible, but also Plato, Ambrose, Jerome, 
and Augustine. He made a vast collection of Latin proverbs, to which, in later editions, he added 
many in Greek; his original purpose was to enable people to write Latin idiomatically. He wrote 
an immensely successful book of Colloquies, to teach people how to talk in Latin about every-day 
matters, such as a game of bowls. This was, perhaps, more useful than it seems now. Latin was the 
only international language, and students at the University of Paris came from all over Western 
Europe. It may have often happened that Latin was the only language in which two students could 
converse. 

After the Reformation, Erasmus lived first in Louvain, which maintained perfect Catholic 
orthodoxy, then in Basel, which became Protestant. Each side tried to enlist him, but for a long 
time in vain. He had, as we have seen, expressed himself strongly about ecclesiastical abuses and 
the wickedness of popes; in 1518, the very year of Luther's revolt, he published a satire, called 
Julius exclusus, describing the failure of Julius II to get to heaven. But Luther's violence repelled 
him, and he hated war. At last he came down on the Catholic side. In 1524 he wrote a work 
defending free will, which Luther, following and exaggerating Augustine, rejected. Luther replied 
savagely, and Erasmus was driven further into reaction. From this time until his death, he became 
increasingly unimportant. He had always been timid, and the times were no longer suited to timid 
people. For honest men, the only honourable alternatives were martyrdom or victory. His friend 
Sir Thomas More was compelled to choose martyrdom, and Erasmus commented: "Would More 
had never meddled with that dangerous business, and left the theological cause to the 
theologians." Erasmus lived too long, into an age of new virtues and new vices— heroism and 
intolerance— neither of which he could acquire. 

Sir Thomas More ( 1478-1535) was, as a man, much more admirable than Erasmus, but much less 
important as an influence. He was a humanist, but also a man of profound piety. At Oxford, he set 
to work to leam Greek, which was then unusual, and was thought to show a sympathy with Italian 
infidels. The authorities and his father objected, 


- 517 - 



and he was removed from the university. Thereupon he was attracted to the Carthusians, practised 
extreme austerities, and contemplated joining the order. He was deterred from doing so, 
apparently by the influence of Erasmus, whom he first met at this time. His father was a lawyer, 
and he decided to follow his father's profession. In 1504 he was a Member of Parliament, and led 
the opposition to Henry VII's demand for new taxes. In this he was successful, but the king was 
furious; he sent More's father to the Tower, releasing him, however, on payment of A£100. On the 
king's death in 1509, More returned to the practice of the law, and won the favour of Henry VIII. 
He was knighted in 1514, and employed on various embassies. The king kept inviting him to 
court, but More would not come; at last the king came uninvited to dine with him at his house in 
Chelsea. More had no illusions as to Henry VIII; when complimented on the king's favourable 
disposition, he replied: "If my head should win him a castle in France it should not fail to go." 

When Wolsey fell, the King appointed More chancellor in his stead. Contrary to the usual 
practice, he refused all gifts from litigants. He soon fell into disfavour, because the king was 
detennined to divorce Catherine of Aragon in order to marry Anne Boleyn, and More was 
unalterably opposed to the divorce. He therefore resigned in 1532. His incorruptibility when in 
office is shown by the fact that after his resignation he had only A£100 a year. In spite of his 
opinions, the king invited him to his wedding with Anne Boleyn, but More refused the invitation. 
In 1534, the king got Parliament to pass the Act of Supremacy, declaring him, not the Pope, the 
head of the Church of England. Under this act an Oath of Supremacy was exacted, which More 
refused to take; this was only misprision of treason, which did not involve the death penalty. It 
was proved, however, by very dubious testimony, that he had said Parliament could not make 
Henry head of the Church; on this evidence he was convicted of high treason, and beheaded. His 
property was given to Princess Elizabeth, who kept it to the day of her death. 

More is remembered almost solely on account of his Utopia ( 1518). Utopia is an island in the 
southern hemisphere, where everything is done in the best possible way. It has been visited 
accidentally by a sailor named Raphael Hythloday, who spent five years there, and only returned 
to Europe to make its wise institutions known. 


- 518 - 



In Utopia, as in Plato's Republic, all things are held in common, for the public good cannot 
flourish where there is private property, and without communism there can be no equality. More, 
in the dialogue, objects that communism would make men idle, and destroy respect for 
magistrates; to this Raphael replies that no one would say this who had lived in Utopia. 

There are in Utopia fifty-four towns, all on the same plan, except that one is the capital. All the 
streets are twenty feet broad, and all the private houses are exactly alike, with one door onto the 
street and one onto the garden. There are no locks on the doors, and every one may enter any 
house. The roofs are flat. Every tenth year people change houses— apparently to prevent any 
feeling of ownership. In the country, there are farms, each containing not fewer than forty persons, 
including two bondmen; each fann is under the rule of a master and mistress, who are old and 
wise. The chickens are not hatched by hens, but in incubators (which did not exist in More's time). 
All are dressed alike, except that there is a difference between the dress of men and women, and 
of married and unmarried. The fashions never change, and no difference is made between summer 
and winter clothing. At work, leather or skins are worn; a suit will last seven years. When they 
stop work, they throw a woollen cloak over their working clothes. All these cloaks are alike, and 
are the natural colour of wool. Each family makes its own clothes. 

Everybody—men and women alike— works six hours a day, three before dinner and three after. All 
go to bed at eight, and sleep eight hours. In the early morning there are lectures, to which 
multitudes go, although they are not compulsory. After supper an hour is devoted to play. Six 
hours' work is enough, because there are no idlers and there is no useless work; with us, it is said, 
women, priests, rich people, servants, and beggars, mostly do nothing useful, and owing to the 
existence of the rich much labour is spent in producing unnecessary luxuries; all this is avoided in 
Utopia. Sometimes, it is found that there is a surplus, and the magistrates proclaim a shorter 
working day for a time. 

Some men are elected to become men of learning, and are exempted from other work while they 
are found satisfactory. All who are concerned with government are chosen from the learned. The 
government is a representative democracy, with a system of indirect election; 


- 519 - 



at the head is a prince who is elected for life, but can be deposed for tyranny. 

Family life is patriarchal; married sons live in their father's house, and are governed by him, 
unless he is in his dotage. If any family grows too large, the surplus children are moved into 
another family. If a town grows too large, some of the inhabitants are moved into another town. If 
all the towns are too large, a new town is built on waste land. Nothing is said as to what is to be 
done when all the waste land is used up. All killing of beasts for food is done by bondmen, lest 
free citizens should leam cruelty. There are hospitals for the sick, which are so excellent that 
people who are ill prefer them. Eating at home is permitted, but most people eat in common halls. 
Here the "vile service" is done by bondmen, but the cooking is done by women and the waiting by 
the older children. Men sic at one bench, women at another; nursing mothers, with children under 
five, are in a separate parlour. All women nurse their own children. Children over five, if too 
young to be waiters, "stand by with marvellous silence," while their elders eat; they have no 
separate dinner, but must be content with such scraps as are given them from the table. 

As for marriage, both men and women are sharply punished if not virgin when they marry; and the 
householder of any house in which misconduct has occurred is liable to incur infamy for 
carelessness. Before marriage, bride and groom see each other naked; no one would buy a horse 
without first taking off the saddle and bridle, and similar considerations should apply in marriage. 
There is divorce for adultery or "intolerable waywardness" of either party, but the guilty party 
cannot remarry. Sometimes divorce is granted solely because both parties desire it. Breakers of 
wedlock are punished by bondage. 

There is foreign trade, chiefly for the purpose of getting iron, of which there is none in the island. 
Trade is used also for purposes connected with war. The Utopians think nothing of martial glory, 
though all learn how to fight, women as well as men. They resort to war for three purposes: to 
defend their own territory when invaded; to deliver the territory of an ally from invaders; and to 
free an oppressed nation from tyranny. But whenever they can, they get mercenaries to fight their 
wars for them. They aim at getting other nations into their debt, and letting them work off the debt 
by supplying mercenaries. For war purposes also they find a store of gold and silver useful, since 


- 520 - 



they can use it to pay foreign mercenaries. For themselves, they have no money, and they teach 
contempt for gold by using it for chamberpots and the chains of bondmen. Pearls and diamonds 
are used as ornaments for infants, but never for adults. When they are at war, they offer large 
rewards to any one who will kill the prince of the enemy country, and still larger rewards to any 
one who will bring him alive, or to himself if he yields himself up. They pity the common people 
among their enemies, "knowing that they be driven and enforced to war against their wills by the 
furious madness of their princes and heads." Women fight as well as men, but no one is compelled 
to fight. "Engines for war they devise and invent wondrous wittily." It will be seen that their 
attitude to war is more sensible than heroic, though they display great courage when necessary. 

As for ethics, we are told that they are too much inclined to think that felicity consists in pleasure. 
This view, however, has no bad consequences, because they think that in the next life the good are 
rewarded and the wicked punished. They are not ascetic, and consider fasting silly. There are 
many religions among them, all of which are tolerated. Almost all believe in God and immortality; 
the few who do not are not accounted citizens, and have no part in political life, but are otherwise 
unmolested. Some holy men eschew meat and matrimony; they are thought holy, but not wise. 
Women can be priests, if they are old and widowed. The priests are few; they have honour, but no 
power. 

Bondmen are people condemned for heinous offenses, or foreigners who have been condemned to 
death in their own countries, but whom the Utopians have agreed to take as bondmen. 

In the case of a painful incurable disease, the patient is advised to commit suicide, but is carefully 
tended if he refuses to do so. 

Raphael Hythloday relates that he preached Christianity to the Utopians, and that many were 
converted when they leamt that Christ was opposed to private property. The importance of 
communism is constantly stressed; almost at the end we are told that in all other nations "I can 
perceive nothing but a certain conspiracy of rich men procuring their own commodities under the 
name and title of the common wealth." 

More's Utopia was in many ways astonishingly liberal. I am not thinking so much of the preaching 
of communism, which was in the 


- 521 - 



tradition of many religious movements. I am thinking rather of what is said about war, about 
religion and religious toleration, against the wanton killing of animals (there is a most eloquent 
passage against hunting), and in favour of a mild criminal law. (The book opens with an argument 
against the death penalty for theft.) It must be admitted, however, that life in More's Utopia, as in 
most others, would be intolerably dull. Diversity is essential to happiness, and in Utopia there is 
hardly any. This is a defect of all planned social systems, actual as well as imaginary. 

CHAPTER V The Reformation and CounterReformation 

THE Reformation and Counter-Reformation, alike, represent the rebellion of less civilized nations 
against the intellectual domination of Italy. In the case of the Reformation, the revolt was also 
political and theological: the authority of the Pope was rejected, and the tribute which he had 
obtained from the power of the keys ceased to be paid. In the case of the Counter-Reformation, 
there was only revolt against the intellectual and moral freedom of Renaissance Italy; the power of 
the Pope was not diminished, but enhanced, while at the same time it was made clear that his 
authority was incompatible with the easy-going laxity of the Borgias and Medici. Roughly 
speaking, the Reformation was German, the Counter-Reformation Spanish; the wars of religion 
were at the same time wars between Spain and its enemies, coinciding in date with the period 
when Spanish power was at its height. 

The attitude of public opinion in northern nations towards Renaissance Italy is illustrated in the 
English saying of that time: 

- 522 - 



An Englishman Italianate Is a devil incarnate 

It will be observed how many of the villains in Shakespeare are Italians. Iago is perhaps the most 
prominent instance, but an even more illustrative one is Iachimo in Cymbeline, who leads astray 
the virtuous Briton travelling in Italy, and comes to England to practise his wicked wiles upon 
unsuspecting natives. Moral indignation against Italians had much to do with the Refonnation. 
Unfortunately it involved also intellectual repudiation of what Italy had done for civilization. 

The three great men of the Reformation and Counter-Reformation are Luther, Calvin, and Loyola. 
Ah three, intellectually, are medieval in philosophy, as compared either with the Italians who 
immediately preceded them, or with such men as Erasmus and More. Philosophically, the century 
following the beginning of the Refonnation is a barren one. Luther and Calvin reverted to Saint 
Augustine, retaining, however, only that part of his teaching which deals with the relation of the 
soul to God, not the part which is concerned with the Church. Their theology was such as to 
diminish the power of the Church. They abolished purgatory, from which the souls of the dead 
could be delivered by masses. They rejected the doctrine of Indulgences, upon which a large part 
of the papal revenue depended. By the doctrine of predestination, the fate of the soul after death 
was made wholly independent of the actions of priests. These innovations, while they helped in 
the struggle with the Pope, prevented the Protestant Churches from becoming as powerful in 
Protestant countries as the Catholic Church was in Catholic countries. Protestant divines were (at 
least at first) just as bigoted as Catholic theologians, but they had less power, and were therefore 
less able to do hann. 

Almost from the very beginning, there was a division among Protestants as to the power of the 
State in religious matters. Luther was willing, wherever the prince was Protestant, to recognize 
him as head of the Church in his own country. In England, Henry VIII and Elizabeth vigorously 
asserted their claims in this respect, and so did the Protestant princes of Germany, Scandinavia, 
and (after the revolt from Spain) Holland. This accelerated the already existing tendency to 
increase in the power of kings. 

But those Protestants who took seriously the individualistic aspects 


- 523 - 



of the Reformation were as unwilling to submit to the king as to the Pope. The Anabaptists in 
Germany were suppressed, but their doctrine spread to Holland and England. The conflict between 
Cromwell and the Long Parliament had many aspects; in its theological aspect, it was in part a 
conflict between those who rejected and those who accepted the view that the State should decide 
in religious matters. Gradually weariness resulting from the wars of religion led to the growth of 
belief in religious toleration, which was one of the sources of the movement which developed into 
eighteenth- and nineteenthcentury liberalism. 

Protestant success, at first amazingly rapid, was checked mainly as a resultant of Loyola's creation 
of the Jesuit order. Loyola had been a soldier, and his order was founded on military models; there 
must be unquestioning obedience to the General, and every Jesuit was to consider himself 
engaged in warfare against heresy. As early as the Council of Trent, the Jesuits began to be 
influential. They were disciplined, able, completely devoted to the cause, and skilful 
propagandists. Their theology was the opposite of that of the Protestants; they rejected those 
elements of Saint Augustine's teaching which the Protestants emphasized. They believed in free 
will, and opposed predestination. Salvation was not by faith alone, but by both faith and works. 
The Jesuits acquired prestige by their missionary zeal, especially in the Far East. They became 
popular as confessors, because (if Pascal is to be believed) they were more lenient, except towards 
heresy, than other ecclesiastics. They concentrated on education, and thus acquired a firm hold on 
the minds of the young. Whenever theology did not interfere, the education they gave was the best 
obtainable; we shall see that they taught Descartes more mathematics than he would have learnt 
elsewhere. Politically, they were a single united disciplined body, shrinking from no dangers and 
no exertions; they urged Catholic princes to practise relentless persecution, and, following in the 
wake of conquering Spanish annies, re-established the terror of the Inquisition, even in Italy, 
which had had nearly a century of free-thought. 

The results of the Reformation and Counter-Reformation, in the intellectual sphere, were at first 
wholly bad, but ultimately beneficial. The Thirty Year's War persuaded everybody that neither 
Protestants nor Catholics could be completely victorious; it became necessary 


- 524 - 



to abandon the medieval hope of doctrinal unity, and this increased men's freedom to think for 
themselves, even about fundamentals. The diversity of creeds in different countries made it 
possible to escape persecution by living abroad. Disgust with theological warfare turned the 
attention of able men increasingly to secular learning, especially mathematics and science. These 
are among the reasons for the fact that, while the sixteenth century, after the rise of Luther, is 
philosophically barren, the seventeenth contains the greatest names and marks the most notable 
advance since Greek times. This advance began in science, with which I shall deal in my next 
chapter. 


CHAPTER VI The Rise of Science 

ALMOST everything that distinguishes the modern world from earlier centuries is attributable to 
science, which achieved its most spectacular triumphs in the seventeenth century. The Italian 
Renaissance, though not medieval, is not modem; it is more akin to the best age of Greece. The 
sixteenth century, with its absorption in theology, is more medieval than the world of Machiavelli. 
The modem world, so far as mental outlook is concerned, begins in the seventeenth century. No 
Italian of the Renaissance would have been unintelligible to Plato or Aristotle; Luther would have 
horrified Thomas Aquinas, but would not have been difficult for him to understand. With the 
seventeenth century it is different: Plato and Aristotle, Aquinas and Occam, could not have made 
head or tail of Newton. 

The new conceptions that science introduced profoundly influenced modern philosophy. 
Descartes, who was in a sense the founder of modern philosophy, was himself one of the creators 
of seventeenthcentury science. Something must be said about the methods and results of 
astronomy and physics before the mental atmosphere of the time in which modern philosophy 
began can be understood. 

Four great men— Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo, and Newton— are 


- 525 - 



pre-eminent in the creation of science. Of these, Copernicus belongs to the sixteenth century, 
but in his own time he had little influence. 

Copernicus ( 1473-1543) was a Polish ecclesiastic, of unimpeachable orthodoxy. In his youth 
he travelled in Italy, and absorbed something of the atmosphere of the Renaissance. In 1500 he 
had a lectureship or professorship of mathematics in Rome, but in 1503 he returned to his 
native land, where he was a canon of Frauenburg. Much of his time seems to have been spent in 
combating the Germans and reforming the currency, but his leisure was devoted to astronomy. 
He came early to believe that the sun is at the centre of the universe, and that the earth has a 
twofold motion: a diurnal rotation, and an annual revolution about the sun. Fear of ecclesiastical 
censure led him to delay publication of his views, though he allowed them to become known. 
His chief work, De Revolutionibus Orbium CA“lestium, was published in the year of his death ( 
1543), with a preface by his friend Osiander saying that the heliocentric theory was only put 
forward as a hypothesis. It is uncertain how far Copernicus sanctioned this statement, but the 
question is not very important, as he himself made similar statements in the body of the book. * 
The book is dedicated to the Pope, and escaped official Catholic condemnation until the time of 
Galileo. The Church in the lifetime of Copernicus was more liberal than it became after the 
Council of Trent, the Jesuits, and the revived Inquisition had done their work. 

The atmospheze of Copernicus's work is not modern; it might rather be described as 
Pythagorean. He takes it as axiomatic that all celestial motions must be circular and uniform, 
and like the Greeks he allows himself to be influenced by Ajsthetic motives. There are still 
epicycles in his system, though their centres are at the sun, or, rather, near the sun. The fact that 
the sun is not exactly in the centre marred the simplicity of his theory. He does not seem to have 
known of Aristarchus's heliocentric theory, but there is nothing in his speculations that could 
not have occurred to a Greek astronomer. What was important in his work was the 
dethronement of the earth from its geometrical pre-eminence. In the long run, this made it 
difficult to give to man the cosmic importance assigned to him in the Christian theology, but 
such consequences of his theory would not have been 


* See Three Copernican Treatises, translated by Edward Rosen, Chicago, 1939. 


- 526 - 


accepted by Copernicus, whose orthodoxy was sincere, and who protested against the view that 
his theory contradicted the Bible. 


There were genuine difficulties in the Copemican theory. The greatest of these was the absence of 
stellar parallax. If the earth at any one point of its orbit is 186,000,000 miles from the point at 
which it will be in six months, this ought to cause a shift in the apparent positions of the stars, just 
as a ship at sea which is due north from one point of the coast will not be due north from another. 
No parallax was observed, and Copernicus rightly inferred that the fixed stars must be very much 
more remote than the sun. It was not till the nineteenth century that the technique of measurement 
became sufficiently precise for stellar parallax to be observed, and then only in the case of a few 
of the nearest stars. 

Another difficulty arose as regards falling bodies. If the earth is continually rotating from west to 
east, a body dropped from a height ought not to fall to a point vertically below its starting-point, 
but to a point somewhat further west, since the earth will have slipped away a certain distance 
during the time of the fall. To this difficulty the answer was found by Galileo's law of inertia, but 
in the time of Copernicus no answer was forthcoming. 

There is an interesting book by E. A. Burtt, called The Metaphisical Foundations of Modern 
Physical Science ( 1925), which sets forth with much force the many unwarrantable assumptions 
made by the men who founded modern science. He points out quite truly that there were in the 
time of Copernicus no known facts which compelled the adoption of his system, and several 
which militated against it. "Contemporary empiricists, had they lived in the sixteenth century, 
would have been the first to scoff out of court the new philosophy of the universe." The general 
purpose of the book is to discredit modern science by suggesting that its discoveries were lucky 
accidents springing by chance from superstitions as gross as those of the Middle Ages. I think this 
shows a misconception of the scientific attitude: it is not what the man of science believes that 
distinguishes him, but how and why he believes it. His beliefs are tentative, not dogmatic; they are 
based on evidence, not on authority or intuition. Copernicus was right to call his theory a 
hypothesis; his opponents were wrong in thinking new hypotheses undesirable. 

The men who founded modern science had two merits which are 


- 527 - 



not necessarily found together: immense patience in observation, and great boldness in framing 
hypotheses. The second of these merits had belonged to the earliest Greek philosophers; the first 
existed, to a considerable degree, in the later astronomers of antiquity. But no one among the 
ancients, except perhaps Aristarchus, possessed both merits, and no one in the Middle Ages 
possessed either. Copernicus, like his great successors, possessed both. He knew all that could be 
known, with the instruments existing in his day, about the apparent motions of the heavenly 
bodies on the celestial sphere, and he perceived that the diurnal rotation of the earth was a more 
economical hypothesis than the revolution of all the celestial spheres. According to modern views, 
which regard all motion as relative, simplicity is the only gain resulting from his hypothesis, but 
this was not his view or that of his contemporaries. As regards the earth's annual revolution, there 
was again a simplification, but not so notable a one as in the case of the diurnal rotation. 
Copernicus still needed epicycles, though fewer than were needed in the Ptolemaic system. It was 
not until Kepler discovered his laws that the new theory acquired its full simplicity. 

Apart from the revolutionary effect on cosmic imagination, the great merits of the new astronomy 
were two: first, the recognition that what had been believed since ancient times might be false; 
second, that the test of scientific truth is patient collection of facts, combined with bold guessing 
as to laws binding the facts together. Neither merit is so fully developed in Copernicus as in his 
successors, but both are already present in a high degree in his work. 

Some of the men to whom Copernicus communicated his theory were German Lutherans, but 
when Luther came to know of it, he was profoundly shocked. "People give ear," he said, "to an 
upstart astrologer who strove to show that the earth revolves, not the heavens or the firmament, 
the sun and the moon. Whoever wishes to appear clever must devise some new system, which of 
all systems is of course the very best. This fool wishes to reverse the entire science of astronomy; 
but sacred Scripture tells us that Joshua commanded the sun to stand still, and not the earth." 
Calvin, similarly, demolished Copernicus with the text: "The world also is stablished, that it 
cannot be moved" (Ps. XCIII, 1), and exclaimed: "Who will venture to place the authority of 
Copernicus above that of the Holy Spirit?" Protestant clergy were at least as bigoted as Catholic 
ecclesiastics; 


- 528 - 



nevertheless there soon came to be much more liberty of speculation in Protestant than in Catholic 
countries, because in Protestant countries the clergy had less power. The important aspect of 
Protestantism was schism, not heresy, for schism led to national Churches, and national Churches 
were not strong enough to control the lay government. This was wholly a gain, for the Churches, 
everywhere, opposed as long as they could practically every innovation that made for an increase 
of happiness or knowledge here on earth. 

Copernicus was not in a position to give any conclusive evidence in favour of his hypothesis, and 
for a long time astronomers rejected it. The next astronomer of importance was Tycho Brahe 
( 1546-1601), who adopted an intermediate position: he held that the sun and moon go round the 
earth, but the planets go round the sun. As regards theory he was not very original. He gave, 
however, two good reasons against Aristotle's view that everything above the moon is unchanging. 
One of these was the appearance of a new star in 1572, which was found to have no daily parallax, 
and must therefore be more distant than the moon. The other reason was derived from observation 
of comets, which were also found to be distant. The reader will remember Aristotle's doctrine that 
change and decay are confined to the sublunary sphere; this, like everything else that Aristotle said 
on scientific subjects, proved an obstacle to progress. 

The importance of Tycho Brahe was not as a theorist, but as an observer, first under the patronage 
of the king of Denmark, then under the Emperor Rudolf II. He made a star catalogue, and noted 
the positions of the planets throughout many years. Towards the end of his life Kepler, then a 
young man, became his assistant. To Kepler his observations were invaluable. 

Kepler ( 1571-1630) is one of the most notable examples of what can be achieved by patience 
without much in the way of genius. He was the first important astronomer after Copernicus to 
adopt the heliocentric theory, but Tycho Brahe's data showed that it could not be quite right in the 
form given to it by Copernicus. He was influenced by Pythagoreanism, and more or less fancifully 
inclined to sun-worship, though a good Protestant. These motives no doubt gave him a bias in 
favour of the heliocentric hypothesis. His Pythagoreanism also inclined him to follow Plato 
Timaeus in supposing that cosmic significance must attach to the five regular solids. He used 


- 529 - 



them to suggest hypotheses to his mind; at last, by good luck, one of these worked. 

Kepler's great achievement was the discovery of his three laws of Planetary motion. Two of these 
he published in 1609, and the third in 1619. His first law states: The planets describe elliptic 
orbits, of which the sun occupies one focus. His second law states: The line joining a planet to the 
sun sweeps out equal areas in equal times. His third law states: The square of the period of 
revolution of a planet is proportioned to the cube of its average distance from the sun. 

Something must be said in explanation of the importance of these laws. 

The first two laws, in Kepler's time, could only be proved in the case of Mars; as regards the other 
planets, the observations were compatible with them, but not such as to establish them definitely. 
It was not long, however, before decisive confirmation was found. 

The discovery of the first law, that the planets move in ellipses, required a greater effort of 
emancipation from tradition than a modem man can easily realize. The one thing upon which all 
astronomers, without exception, had been agreed, was that all celestial motions are circular, or 
compounded of circular motions. Where circles were found inadequate to explain planetary 
motions, epicycles were used. An epicycle is the curve traced by a point on a circle which rolls on 
another circle. For example: take a big wheel and fasten it flat on the ground; take a smaller wheel 
which has a nail through it, and roll the smaller wheel (also flat on the ground) round the big 
wheel, with the point of the nail touching the ground. Then the mark of the nail in the ground will 
trace out an epicycle. The orbit of the moon, in relation to the sun, is roughly of this kind: 
approximately, the earth describes a circle round the sun, and the moon meanwhile describes a 
circle round the earth. But this is only an approximation. As observation grew more exact, it was 
found that no system of epicycles would exactly fit the facts. Kepler's hypothesis, he found, was 
far more closely in accord with the recorded positions of Mars than was that of Ptolemy, or even 
that of Copernicus. 

The substitution of ellipses for circles involved the abandonment of the Ajsthetic bias which had 
governed astronomy ever since Pythagoras. The circle was a perfect figure, and the celestial orbs 
were perfect bodies— originally gods, and even in Plato and Aristotle closely 


- 530 - 



related to gods. It seemed obvious that a perfect body must move in a perfect figure. Moreover, 
since the heavenly bodies move freely, without being pushed or pulled, their motion must be 
"natural." Now it was easy to suppose that there is something "natural" about a circle, but not 
about an ellipse. Thus many deep-seated prejudices had to be discarded before Kepler’s first law 
could be accepted. No ancient, not even Aristarchus of Samos, had anticipated such an hypothesis. 

The second law deals with the varying velocity of the planet at different points of its orbit. If S is 
the sun, and P | , P 2 ¦> P 3 •> P 4 •> P 5 arc successive positions of the planet at equal intervals of 

time-say at intervals of a month— then Kepler's law states that the areas P | SP2,P2^^3’^3 
SP 4 , P 4 SP 5 are all equal. The planet therefore moves fastest when it is nearest to the sun, and 

slowest when it is farthest from it. This, again, was shocking; a planet ought to be too stately to 
hurry at one time and dawdle at another. 

The third law was important because it compared the movements of different planets, whereas the 
first two laws dealt with the several planets singly. The third law says: If r is the average distance 

of a planet from the sun, and T is the length of its year, then P divided by T^ is the same for all 
the different planets. This law afforded the proof (as far as the solar system is concerned) of 
Newton's law of the inverse square for gravitation. But of this we shall speak later. 

Galileo ( 1564-1642) is the greatest of the founders of modern science, with the possible 
exception of Newton. He was bom on about the day on which Michelangelo died, and he died in 
the year in which Newton was born. I commend these facts to those (if any) who still believe in 
metempsychosis. He is important as an astronomer, but perhaps even more as the founder of 
dynamics. 

Galileo first discovered the importance of acceleration in dynamics. "Acceleration" means change 
of velocity, whether in magnitude or direction; thus a body moving unifonnly in a circle has at all 
times an acceleration towards the centre of the circle. In the language that had been customary 
before his time, we might say that he treated uniform motion in a straight line as alone "natural," 
whether on earth or in the heavens. It had been thought "natural" for heavenly bodies to move in 
circles, and for terrestrial bodies to move in straight lines; but moving terrestrial bodies, it was 
thought, would gradually cease to move if they were let alone. Galileo held, as against this view, 
that 


- 531 - 



every body, if let alone, will continue to move in a straight line with unifonn velocity; any change, 
either in the rapidity or the direction of motion, requires to be explained as due to the action of 
some "force." This principle was enunciated by Newton as the "first law of motion." It is also 
called the law of inertia. I shall return to its purport later, but first something must be said as to the 
detail of Galileo's discoveries. 

Galileo was the first to establish the law of falling bodies. This law, given the concept of 
"acceleration," is of the utmost simplicity. It says that, when a body is falling freely, its 
acceleration is constant, except in so far as the resistance of the air may interfere; further, the 
acceleration is the same for all bodies, heavy or light, great or small. The complete proof of this 
law was not possible until the air pump had been invented, which was about 1654. After this, it 
was possible to observe bodies falling in what was practically a vacuum, and it was found that 
feathers fell as fast as lead. What Galileo proved was that there is no measurable difference 
between large and small lumps of the same substance. Until his time it had been supposed that a 
large lump of lead would fall much quicker than a small one, but Galileo proved by experiment 
that this is not the case. Measurement, in his day, was not such an accurate business as it has since 
become; nevertheless he arrived at the true law of falling bodies. If a body is falling freely in a 
vacuum, its velocity increases at a constant rate. At the end of the first second, its velocity will be 
32 feet per second; at the end of another second, 64 feet per second; at the end of the third, 96 feet 
per second; and so on. The acceleration, i.e., the rate at which the velocity increases, is always the 
same; in each second, the increase of velocity is (approximately) 32 feet per second. 

Galileo also studied projectiles, a subject of importance to his employer, the duke of Tuscany. It 
had been thought that a projectile fired horizontally will move horizontally for a while, and then 
suddenly begin to fall vertically. Galileo showed that, apart from the resistance of the air, the 
horizontal velocity would remain constant, in accordance with the law of inertia, but a vertical 
velocity would be added, which would grow according to the law of falling bodies. To find out 
how the projectile will move during some short time, say a second, after it has been in flight for 
some time, we proceed as follows: First, if it were not falling, it would cover a certain horizontal 
distance, 


- 532 - 



equal to that which it covered in the first second of its flight. Second, if it were not moving 
horizontally, but merely falling, it would fall vertically with a velocity proportional to the time 
since the flight began. In fact, its change of place is what it would be if it first moved horizontally 
for a second with the initial velocity, and then fell vertically for a second with a velocity 
proportional to the time during which it has been in flight. A simple calculation shows that its 
consequent course is a parabola, and this is confirmed by observation except in so far as the 
resistance of the air interferes. 

The above gives a simple instance of a principle which proved immensely fruitful in dynamics, 
the principle that, when several forces act simultaneously, the effect is as if each acted in turn. 

This is part of a more general principle called the parallelogram law. Suppose, for example, that 
you are on the deck of a moving ship, and you walk across the deck. While you are walking the 
ship has moved on, so that, in relation to the water, you have moved both forward and across the 
direction of the ship’s motion. If you want to know where you will have got to in relation to the 
water, you may suppose that first you stood still while the ship moved, and then, for an equal time, 
the ship stood still while you walked across it. The same principle applies to forces. This makes it 
possible to work out the total effect of a number of forces, and makes it feasible to analyse 
physical phenomena, discovering the separate laws of the several forces to which moving bodies 
are subject. It was Galileo who introduced this immensely fruitful method. 

In what I have been saying, I have tried to speak, as nearly as possible, in the language of the 
seventeenth century. Modern language is different in important respects, but to explain what the 
seventeenth century achieved it is desirable to adopt its modes of expression for the time being. 

The law of inertia explained a puzzle which, before Galileo, the Copemican system had been 
unable to explain. As observed above, if you drop a stone from the top of a tower, it will fall at the 
foot of the tower, not somewhat to the west of it; yet, if the earth is rotating, it ought to have 
slipped away a certain distance during the fall of the stone. The reason this does not happen is that 
the stone retains the velocity of rotation which, before being dropped, it shared with everything 
else on the earth's surface. In fact, if the tower were high 


- 533 - 



enough, there would be the opposite effect to that expected by the opponents of Copernicus. The 
top of the tower, being further from the centre of the earth than the bottom, is moving faster, and 
therefore the stone should fall slightly to the east of the foot of the tower. This effect, however, 
would be too slight to be measurable. 

Galileo ardently adopted the heliocentric system; he corresponded with Kepler, and accepted his 
discoveries. Having heard that a Dutchman had lately invented a telescope, Galileo made one 
himself, and very quickly discovered a number of important things. He found that the Milky Way 
consists of a multitude of separate stars. He observed the phases of Venus, which Copernicus 
knew to be implied by his theory, but which the naked eye was unable to perceive. He discovered 
the satellites of Jupiter, which, in honour of his employer, he called "sidera medicea." It was found 
that these satellites obey Kepler's laws. There was, however, a difficulty. There had always been 
seven heavenly bodies, the five planets and the sun and moon; now seven is a sacred number. Is 
not the Sabbath the seventh day? Were there not the seven-branched candlesticks and the seven 
churches of Asia? What, then, could be more appropriate than that there should be seven heavenly 
bodies? But if we have to add Jupiter's four moons, that makes eleven— a number which has no 
mystic properties. On this ground the traditionalists denounced the telescope, refused to look 
through it, and maintained that it revealed only delusions. Galileo wrote to Kepler wishing they 
could have a good laugh together at the stupidity of "the mob"; the rest of his letter makes it plain 
that "the mob" consisted of the professors of philosophy, who tried to conjure away Jupiter's 
moons, using "logic-chopping arguments as though they were magical incantations." 

Galileo, as every one knows, was condemned by the Inquisition, first privately in 1616, and then 
publicly in 1633, on which latter occasion he recanted, and promised never again to maintain that 
the earth rotates or revolves. The Inquisition was successful in putting an end to science in Italy, 
which did not revive there for centuries. But it failed to prevent men of science from adopting the 
heliocentric theory, and did considerable damage to the Church by its stupidity. Fortunately there 
were Protestant countries, where the clergy, however anxious to do hann to science, were unable 
to gain control of the State. 


- 534 - 



Newton ( 1647-1727) achieved the final and complete triumph for which Copernicus, Kepler, 
and Galileo had prepared the way. Starting from his three laws of motion— of which the first two 
are due to Galileo— he proved that Kepler's three laws are equivalent to the proposition that 
every planet, at every moment, has an acceleration towards the sun which varies inversely as the 
square of the distance from the sun. He showed that accelerations towards the earth and the sun, 
following the same formula, explain the moon's motion, and that the acceleration of falling 
bodies on the earth's surface is again related to that of the moon according to the inverse square 
law. He defined "force" as the cause of change of motion, i.e., of acceleration. He was thus able 
to enunciate his law of universal gravitation: "Every body attracts every other with a force 
directly proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of 
the distance between them." From this fonnula he was able to deduce everything in planetary 
theory: the motions of the planets and their satellites, the orbits of comets, the tides. It appeared 
later that even the minute departures from elliptical orbits on the part of the planets were 
deducible from Newton's law. The triumph was so complete that Newton was in danger of 
becoming another Aristotle, and imposing an insuperable barrier to progress. In England, it was 
not till a century after his death that men freed themselves from his authority sufficiently to do 
important original work in the subjects of which he had treated. 

The seventeenth century was remarkable, not only in astronomy and dynamics, but in many 
other ways connected with science. 

Take first the question of scientific instruments. ^_The compound microscope was invented just 
before the seventeenth century, about 1590. The telescope was invented in 1608, by a 
Dutchman named Lippershey, though it was Galileo who first made serious use of it for 
scientific purposes. Galileo also invented the thermometer— at least, this seems most probable. 
His pupil Torricelli invented the barometer. Guericke ( 1602-86) invented the air pump. Clocks, 
though not new, were greatly improved in the seventeenth century, largely by the work of 
Galileo. Owing to these inventions, scientific observa- 


* On this subject, see the chapter "Scientific Instruments" in A History of Science, 
Technology, and Philosophy in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries , by A. Wolf. 


- 535 - 


tion became immensely more exact and more extensive than it had been at any former time. 

Next, there was important work in other sciences than astronomy and dynamics. Gilbert ( 1540- 
1603) published his great book on the magnet in 1600. Harvey ( 1578-1657) discovered the 
circulation of the blood, and published his discovery in 1628. Leeuwenhoek ( 16321723) 
discovered spennatozoa, though another man, Stephen Hamm, had discovered them, apparently, a 
few months earlier; Leeuwenhoek also discovered protozoa or unicellular organisms, and even 
bacteria. Robert Boyle ( 1627-91) was, as children were taught when I was young, "the father of 
chemistry and son of the Earl of Cork"; he is now chiefly remembered on account of "Boyle's 
Law," that in a given quantity of gas at a given temperature, pressure is inversely proportional to 
volume. 

I have hitherto said nothing of the advances in pure mathematics, but these were very great indeed, 
and were indispensable to much of the work in the physical sciences. Napier published his 
invention of logarithms in 1614. Co-ordinate geometry resulted from the work of several 
seventeenth-century mathematicians, among whom the greatest contribution was made by 
Descartes. The differential and integral calculus was invented independently by Newton and 
Leibniz; it is the instrument for almost all higher mathematics. These are only the most 
outstanding achievements in pure mathematics; there were innumerable others of great 
importance. 

The consequence of the scientific work we have been considering was that the outlook of 
educated men was completely transformed. At the beginning of the century, Sir Thomas Browne 
took part in trials for witchcraft; at the end, such a thing would have been impossible. In 
Shakespeare's time, comets were still portents; after the publication of Newton Principia in 1687, 
it was known that he and Halley had calculated the orbits of certain comets, and that they were as 
obedient as the planets to the law of gravitation. The reign of law had established its hold on 
men's imaginations, making such things as magic and sorcery incredible. In 1700 the mental 
outlook of educated men was completely modern; in 1600, except among a very few, it was still 
largely medieval. 

In the remainder of this chapter I shall try to state briefly the philosophical beliefs which appeared 
to follow from seventeenth 


- 536 - 



century science, and some of the respects in which modem science differs from that of Newton. 

The first thing to note is the removal of almost all traces of animism from the laws of physics. The 
Greeks, though they did not say so explicitly, evidently considered the power of movement a sign 
of life. To common-sense observation it seems that animals move themselves, while dead matter 
only moves when impelled by an external force. The soul of an animal, in Aristotle, has various 
functions, and one of them is to move the animal's body. The sun and planets, in Greek thinking, 
are apt to be gods, or at least regulated and moved by gods. Anaxagoras thought otherwise, but 
was impious. Democritus thought otherwise, but was neglected, except by the Epicureans, in 
favour of Plato and Aristotle. Aristotle's forty-seven or fifty-five unmoved movers are divine 
spirits, and are the ultimate source of all the motion in the universe. Left to itself, any inanimate 
body would soon become motionless; thus the operation of soul on matter has to be continuous if 
motion is not to cease. 

All this was changed by the first law of motion. Lifeless matter, once set moving, will continue to 
move for ever unless stopped by some external cause. Moreover the external causes of change of 
motion turned out to be themselves material, whenever they could be definitely ascertained. The 
solar system, at any rate, was kept going by its own momentum and its own laws; no outside 
interference was needed. There might still seem to be need of God to set the mechanism working; 
the planets, according to Newton, were originally hurled by the hand of God. But when He had 
done this, and decreed the law of gravitation, everything went on by itself without further need of 
divine intervention. When Laplace suggested that the same forces which are now operative might 
have caused the planets to grow out of the sun, God's share in the course of nature was pushed still 
further back. He might remain as Creator, but even that was doubtful, since it was not clear that 
the world had a beginning in time. Although most of the men of science were models of piety, the 
outlook suggested by their work was disturbing to orthodoxy, and the theologians were quite 
justified in feeling uneasy. 

Another thing that resulted from science was a profound change in the conception of man’s place 
in the universe. In the medieval world, the earth was the centre of the heavens, and everything had 
a purpose 


- 537 - 



concerned with man. In the Newtonian world, the earth was a minor planet of a not specially 
distinguished star; astronomical distances were so vast that the earth, in comparison, was a mere 
pin-point. It seemed unlikely that this immense apparatus was all designed for the good of certain 
small creatures on this pin-point. Moreover purpose, which had since Aristotle formed an intimate 
part of the conception of science, was now thrust out of scientific procedure. Any one might still 
believe that the heavens exist to declare the glory of God, but no one could let this belief intervene 
in an astronomical calculation. The world might have a purpose, but purposes could no longer 
enter into scientific explanations. 

The Copernican theory should have been humbling to human pride, but in fact the contrary effect 
was produced, for the triumphs of science revived human pride. The dying ancient world had been 
obsessed with a sense of sin, and had bequeathed this as an oppression to the Middle Ages. To be 
humble before God was both right and prudent, for God would punish pride. Pestilences, floods, 
earthquakes, Turks, Tartars, and comets perplexed the gloomy centuries, and it was felt that only 
greater and greater humility would avert these real or threatened calamities. But it became 
impossible to remain humble when men were achieving such triumphs: 

Nature and Nature's laws lay hid in night. God said "Let Newton be," and all was light. 

And as for damnation, surely the Creator of so vast a universe had something better to think about 
than sending men to hell for minute theological errors. Judas Iscariot might be damned, but not 
Newton, though he were an Arian. 

There were of course many other reasons for self-satisfaction. The Tartars had been confined to 
Asia, and the Turks were ceasing to be a menace. Comets had been humbled by Halley, and as for 
earthquakes, though they were still formidable, they were so interesting that men of science could 
hardly regret them. Western Europeans were growing rapidly richer, and were becoming lords of 
all the world: they had conquered North and South America, they were powerful in Africa and 
India, respected in China and feared in Japan. When to all this were added the triumphs of 
science, it is no wonder that the men of the seventeenth century felt themselves to be fine 


- 538 - 



fellows, not the miserable sinners that they still proclaimed themselves on Sundays. 

There are some respects in which the concepts of modem theoretical physics differ from those of 
the Newtonian system. To begin with, the conception of "force," which is prominent in the 
seventeenth century, has been found to be superfluous. "Force," in Newton, is the cause of change 
of motion, whether in magnitude or direction. The notion of cause is regarded as important, and 
force is conceived imaginatively as the sort of thing that we experience when we push or pull. For 
this reason it was considered an objection to gravitation that it acted at a distance, and Newton 
himself conceded that there must be some medium by which it was transmitted. Gradually it was 
found that all the equations could be written down without bringing in forces. What was 
observable was a certain relation between acceleration and configuration; to say that this relation 
was brought about by the intermediacy of "force" was to add nothing to our knowledge. 
Observation shows that planets have at all times an acceleration towards the sun, which varies 
inversely as the square of their distance from it. To say that this is due to the "force" of gravitation 
is merely verbal, like saying that opium makes people sleep because it has a donnitive virtue. The 
modem physicist, therefore, merely states formulAj which detennine accelerations, and avoids the 
word "force" altogether. "Force" was the faint ghost of the vitalist view as to the causes of 
motions, and gradually the ghost has been exorcized. 

Until the coming of quantum mechanics, nothing happened to modify in any degree what is the 
essential purport of the first two laws of motion, namely this: that the laws of dynamics are to be 
stated in terms of accelerations. In this respect, Copernicus and Kepler are still to be classed with 
the ancients; they sought laws stating the shapes of the orbits of the heavenly bodies. Newton 
made it clear that laws stated in this form could never be more than approximate. The planets do 
not move in exact ellipses, because of the perturbations caused by the attractions of other planets. 
Nor is the orbit of a planet ever exactly repeated, for the same reason. But the law of gravitation, 
which deals with accelerations, was very simple, and was thought to be quite exact until two 
hundred years after Newton's time. When it was emended by Einstein, it still remained a law 
dealing with accelerations. 


- 539 - 



It is true that the conservation of energy is a law dealing with velocities, not accelerations. But in 
calculations which use this law it is still accelerations that have to be employed. 

As for the changes introduced by quantum mechanics, they are very profound, but still, to some 
degree, a matter of controversy and uncertainty. 

There is one change from the Newtonian philosophy which must be mentioned now, and that is 
the abandonment of absolute space and time. The reader will remember a mention of this question 
in connection with Democritus. Newton believed in a space composed of points, and a time 
composed of instants, which had an existence independent of the bodies and events that occupied 
them. As regards space, he had an empirical argument to support his view, namely that physical 
phenomena enable us to distinguish absolute rotation. If the water in a bucket is rotated, it climbs 
up the sides and is depressed in the centre; but if the bucket is rotated while the water is not, there 
is no such effect. Since his day, the experiment of Foucault's pendulum has been devised, giving 
what has been considered a demonstration of the earth's rotation. Even on the most modern views, 
the question of absolute rotation presents difficulties. If all motion is relative, the difference 
between the hypothesis that the earth rotates and the hypothesis that the heavens revolve is purely 
verbal; it is no more than the difference between "John is the father of James" and "James is the 
son of John." But if the heavens revolve, the stars move faster than light, which is considered 
impossible. It cannot be said that the modem answers to this difficulty are completely satisfying, 
but they are sufficiently satisfying to cause almost all physicists to accept the view that motion and 
space are purely relative. This, combined with the amalgamation of space and time into space- 
time, has considerably altered our view of the universe from that which resulted from the work of 
Galileo and Newton. But of this, as of quantum theory, I will say no more at this time. 

-540- 

CHAPTER VII Francis Bacon 

FRANCIS BACON ( 1561-1626), although his philosophy is in many ways unsatisfactory, has 
pennanent importance as the founder of modern inductive method and the pioneer in the attempt 
at logical systematization of scientic procedure. 

He was a son of Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and his aunt was the wife of 
Sir William Cecil, afterwards Lord Burghley; he thus grew up in the atmosphere of state affairs. 

He entered Parliament at the age of twenty-three, and became adviser to Essex. None the less, 
when Essex fell from favour he helped in his prosecution. For this he has been severely blamed: 
Lytton Strachey, for example, in his Elizabeth and Essex, represents Bacon as a monster of 
treachery and ingratitude. This is quite unjust. He worked with Essex while Essex was loyal, but 
abandoned him when continued loyalty to him would have been treasonable; in this there was 
nothing that even the most rigid moralist of the age could condemn. 

In spite of his abandonment of Essex, he was never completely in favour during the lifetime of 
Queen Elizabeth. With James's accession, however, his prospects improved. In 1617 he acquired 
his father's office of Keeper of the Great Seal, and in 1618 he became Lord Chancellor. But after 
he had held this great position for only two years, he was prosecuted for accepting bribes from 
litigants. He admitted the truth of accusation, pleading only that presents never influenced his 
decision. As to that, any one may fonn his own opinion, since there can be no evidence as to the 
decisions that Bacon would have come to in other circumstances. He was condemned to a fine of 
A£40,000, to imprisonment in the Tower during the king's pleasure, to perpetual banishment from 
court and inability to hold office. This sentence was only very partially executed. He was not 
forced to pay the fine, and he was kept in the Tower for only four days. But he was 


- 541 - 



compelled to abandon public life, and to spend the remainder of his days in writing important 
books. 

The ethics of the legal profession, in those days, were somewhat lax. Almost every judge accepted 
presents, usually from both sides. Nowadays we think it atrocious for a judge to take bribes, but 
even more atrocious, after taking them, to decide against the givers of them. In those days, 
presents were a matter of course, and a judge showed his "virtue" by not being influenced by 
them. Bacon was condemned as an incident in a party squabble, not because he was exceptionally 
guilty. He was not a man of outstanding moral eminence, like his forerunner Sir Thomas More, 
but he was also not exceptionally wicked. Morally, he was an average man, no better and no 
worse than the bulk of his contemporaries. 

After five years spent in retirement, he died of a chill caught while experimenting on refrigeration 
by stuffing a chicken full of snow. 

Bacon's most important book, The Advancement of Learning, is in many ways remarkably 
modem. He is commonly regarded as the originator of the saying "Knowledge is power," and 
though he may have had predecessors who said the same thing, he said it with new emphasis. The 
whole basis of his philosophy was practical: to give mankind mastery over the forces of nature by 
means of scientific discoveries and inventions. He held that philosophy should be kept separate 
from theology, not intimately blended with it as in scholasticism. He accepted orthodox religion; 
he was not the man to quarrel with the government on such a matter. But while he thought that 
reason could show the existence of God, he regarded everything else in theology as known only by 
revelation. Indeed he held that the triumph of faith is greatest when to the unaided reason a dogma 
appears most absurd. Philosophy, however, should depend only upon reason. He was thus an 
advocate of the doctrine of "double truth," that of reason and that of revelation. This doctrine had 
been preached by certain Averroists in the thirteenth century, but had been condemned by the 
Church. The "triumph of faith" was, for the orthodox, a dangerous device. Bayle, in the late 
seventeenth century, made ironical use of it, setting forth at great length all that reason could say 
against some orthodox belief, and then concluding "so much the greater is the triumph of faith in 
nevertheless believing." How far Bacon's orthodoxy was sincere it is impossible to know. 


- 542 - 



Bacon was the first of the long line of scientifically minded philosophers who have emphasized 
the importance of induction as opposed to deduction. Like most of his successors, he tried to find 
some better kind of induction than what is called "induction by simple enumeration." Induction by 
simple enumeration may be illustrated by a parable. There was once upon a time a census officer 
who had to record the names of all householders in a certain Welsh village. The first that he 
questioned was called William Williams; so were the second, third, fourth, ... At last he said to 
himself: "This is tedious; evidently they are all called William Williams. I shall put them down so 
and take a holiday." But he was wrong; there was just one whose name was John Jones. This 
shows that we may go astray if we trust too implicitly in induction by simple enumeration. 

Bacon believed that he had a method by which induction could be made something better than 
this. He wished, for example, to discover the nature of heat, which he supposed (rightly) to consist 
of rapid irregular motions of the small parts of bodies. His method was to make lists of hot bodies, 
lists of cold bodies, and lists of bodies of varying degrees of heat. He hoped that these lists would 
show some characteristic always present in hot bodies and absent in cold bodies, and present in 
varying degrees in bodies of different degress of heat. By this method he expected to arrive at 
general laws, having, in the first instance, the lowest degree of generality. From a number of such 
laws he hoped to reach laws of the second degree of generality, and so on. A suggested law should 
be tested by being applied in new circumstances; if it worked in these circumstances it was to that 
extent confirmed. Some instances are specially valuable because they enable us to decide between 
two theories, each possible so far as previous observations are concerned; such instances are 
called "prerogative" instances. 

Bacon not only despised the syllogism, but undervalued mathematics, presumably as insufficiently 
experimental. He was virulently hostile to Aristotle, but thought very highly of Democritus. 
Although he did not deny that the course of nature exemplifies a Divine purpose, he objected to 
any admixture of teleological explanation in the actual investigation of phenomena; everything, he 
held, should be explained as following necessarily from efficient causes. 

He valued his method as showing how to arrange the observational 


- 543 - 



data upon which science must be based. We ought, he says, to be neither like spiders, which spin 
things out of their own insides, nor like ants, which merely collect, but like bees, which both 
collect and arrange. This is somewhat unfair to the ants, but it illustrates Bacon's meaning. 

One of the most famous parts of Bacon's philosophy is his enumeration of what he calls "idols," 
by which he means bad habits of mind that cause people to fall into error. Of these he enumerates 
five kinds. "Idols of the tribe" are those that are inherent in human nature; he mentions in 
particular the habit of expecting more order in natural phenomena than is actually to be found. 
"Idols of the cave" are personal prejudices, characteristic of the particular investigator. "Idols of 
the market-place" are those that have to do with the tyranny of words and the difficulty of 
escaping from their influence over our minds. "Idols of the theatre" are those that have to do with 
received systems of thought; of these, naturally Aristotle and the scholastics afforded him the 
most noteworthy instances. Lastly there are "idols of the schools," which consist in thinking that 
some blind rule (such as the syllogism) can take the place of judgement in investigation. 

Although science was what interested Bacon, and although his general outlook was scientific, he 
missed most of what was being done in science in his day. He rejected the Copernican theory, 
which was excusable so far as Copernicus himself was concerned, since he did not advance any 
very solid arguments. But Bacon ought to have been convinced by Kepler, whose New Astronomy 
appeared in 1609. Bacon appears not to have known of the work of Vesalius, the pioneer of 
modem anatomy, or of Gilbert, whose work on magnetism brilliantly illustrated inductive method. 
Still more surprising, he seemed unconscious of the work of Harvey, although Harvey was his 
medical attendant. It is true that Harvey did not publish his discovery of the circulation of the 
blood until after Bacon's death, but one would have supposed that Bacon would have been aware 
of his researches. Harvey had no very high opinion of him, saying "he writes philosophy like a 
Lord Chancellor." No doubt Bacon could have done better if he had been less concerned with 
worldly success. 

Bacon's inductive method is faulty through insufficient emphasis on hypothesis. He hoped that 
mere orderly arrangement of data would make the right hypothesis obvious, but this is seldom the 
case. As a 


- 544 - 



rule, the framing of hypotheses is the most difficult part of scientific work, and the part where 
great ability is indispensable. So far, no method has been found which would make it possible to 
invent hypotheses by rule. Usually some hypothesis is a necessary preliminary to the collection of 
facts, since the selection of facts demands some way of determining relevance. Without something 
of this kind, the mere multiplicity of facts is baffling. 

The part played by deduction in science is greater than Bacon supposed. Often, when a hypothesis 
has to be tested, there is a long deductive journey from the hypothesis to some consequence that 
can be tested by observation. Usually the deduction is mathematical, and in this respect Bacon 
underestimated the importance of mathematics in scientific investigation. 

The problem of induction by simple enumeration remains unsolved to this day. Bacon was quite 
right in rejecting simple enumeration where the details of scientific investigation are concerned, 
for in dealing with details we may assume general laws on the basis of which, so long as they are 
taken as valid, more or less cogent methods can be built up. John Stuart Mill framed four canons 
of inductive method, which can be usefully employed so long as the law of causality is assumed; 
but this law itself, he had to confess, is to be accepted solely on the basis of induction by simple 
enumeration. The thing that is achieved by the theoretical organization of science is the collection 
of all subordinate inductions into a few that are very comprehensive —perhaps only one. Such 
comprehensive inductions are confirmed by so many instances that it is thought legitimate to 
accept, as regards them, an induction by simple enumeration. This situation is profoundly 
unsatisfactory, but neither Bacon nor any of his successors have found a way out of it. 

-545- 

CHAPTER VIII Hobbes's Leviathan 

HOBBES ( 1588-1679) is a philosopher whom it is difficult to classify. He was an empiricist, like 
Locke, Berkeley, and Hume, but unlike them, he was an admirer of mathematical method, not 
only in pure mathematics, but in its applications. His general outlook was inspired by Galileo 
rather than Bacon. From Descartes to Kant, Continental philosophy derived much of its 
conception of the nature of human knowledge from mathematics, but it regarded mathematics as 
known independently of experience. It was thus led, like Platonism, to minimize the part played 
by perception, and over-emphasize the part played by pure thought. English empiricism, on the 
other hand, was little influenced by mathematics, and tended to have a wrong conception of 
scientific method. Hobbes had neither of these defects. It is not until our own day that we find any 
other philosophers who were empiricists and yet laid due stress on mathematics. In this respect, 
Hobbes's merit is great. He has, however, grave defects, which make it impossible to place him 
quite in the first rank. He is impatient of subtleties, and too much inclined to cut the Gordian knot. 
His solutions of problems are logical, but are attained by omitting awkward facts. He is vigorous, 
but crude; he wields the battle-axe better than the rapier. Nevertheless, his theory of the State 
deserves to be carefully considered, the more so as it is more modem than any previous theory, 
even that of Machiavelli. 

Hobbes's father was a vicar, who was ill-tempered and uneducated; he lost his job by quarrelling 
with a neighbouring vicar at the church door. After this, Hobbes was brought up by an uncle. He 
acquired a good knowledge of the classics, and translated The Medea of Euripides into Latin 
iambics at the age of fourteen. (In later life, he boasted, justifiably, that though he abstained from 
quoting classical poets and orators, this was not from lack of familiarity with their works.) At 


- 546 - 



fifteen, he went to Oxford, where they taught him scholastic logic and the philosophy of Aristotle. 
These were his bugbears in later life, and he maintained that he had profited little by his years at 
the university; indeed universities in general are constantly criticized in his writings. In the year 
1610, when he was twenty-two years old, he became tutor to Lord Hardwick (afterwards second 
Earl of Devonshire), with whom he made the grand tour. It was at this time that he began to know 
the work of Galileo and Kepler, which profoundly influenced him. His pupil became his patron, 
and remained so until he died in 1628. Through him, Hobbes met Ben Jonson and Bacon and Lord 
Herbert of Cherbury, and many other important men. After the death of the Earl of Devonshire, 
who left a young son, Hobbes lived for a time in Paris, where he began the study of Euclid; then 
he became tutor to his fonner pupil's son. With him he travelled to Italy, where he visited Galileo 
in 1636. In 1637 he came back to England. 

The political opinions expressed in the Leviathan, which were Royalist in the extreme, had been 
held by Hobbes for a long time. When the Parliament of 1628 drew up the Petition of Right, he 
published a translation of Thucydides, with the expressed intention of showing the evils of 
democracy. When the Long Parliament met in 1640, and Laud and Strafford were sent to the 
Tower, Hobbes was terrified and fled to France. His book De Cive, written in 1641, though not 
published till 1647, sets forth essentially the same theory as that of the Leviathan. It was not the 
actual occurrence of the Civil War that caused his opinions, but the prospect of it; naturally, 
however, his convictions were strengthened when his fears were realized. 

In Paris he was welcomed by many of the leading mathematicians and men of science. He was one 
of those who saw Descartes' Meditations before they were published, and wrote objections to 
them, which were printed by Descartes with his replies. He also soon had a large company of 
English Royalist refugees with whom to associate. For a time, from 1646 to 1648, he taught 
mathematics to the future Charles II. When, however, in 1651, he published the Leviathan, it 
pleased no one. Its rationalism offended most of the refugees, and its bitter attacks on the Catholic 
Church offended the French government. Hobbes therefore fled secretly to London, where he 
made submission to Cromwell, and abstained from all political activity. 


- 547 - 



He was not idle, however, either at this time or at any other during his long life. He had a 
controversy with Bishop Bramhall on free will; he was himself a rigid determinist. Over- 
estimating his own capacities as a geometer, he imagined that he had discovered how to square the 
circle; on this subject he very foolishly embarked on a controversy with Wallis, the professor of 
geometry at Oxford. Naturally the professor succeeded in making him look silly. 

At the Restoration, Hobbes was taken up by the less earnest of the king's friends, and by the king 
himself, who not only had Hobbes's portrait on his walls, but awarded him a pension of A£100 a 
year-- which, however, His Majesty forgot to pay. The Lord Chancellor Clarendon was shocked by 
the favour shown to a man suspected of atheism, and so was Parliament. After the Plague and the 
Great Fire, when people's superstitious fears were aroused, the House of Commons appointed a 
committee to inquire into atheistical writings, specially mentioning those of Hobbes. From this 
time onwards, he could not obtain leave in England to print anything on controversial subjects. 
Even his history of the Long Parliament, which he called Behemoth, though it set forth the most 
orthodox doctrine, had to be printed abroad ( 1668). The collected edition of his works in 1688 
appeared in Amsterdam. In his old age, his reputation abroad was much greater than in England. 
To occupy his leisure, he wrote, at eighty-four, an autobiography in Latin verse, and published, at 
eighty-seven, a translation of Homer. I cannot discover that he wrote any large books after the age 
of eighty-seven. 

We will now consider the doctrines of the Leviathan, upon which the fame of Hobbes mainly 
rests. 

He proclaims, at the very beginning of the book, his thoroughgoing materialism. Life, he says, is 
nothing but a motion of the limbs, and therefore automata have an artificial life. The 
commonwealth, which he calls Leviathan, is a creation of art, and is in fact an artificial man. This 
is intended as more than an analogy, and is worked out in some detail. The sovereignty is an 
artificial soul. The pacts and covenants by which "Leviathan" is first created take the place of 
God's fiat when He said "Let Us make man." 

The first part deals with man as an individual, and with such general philosophy as Hobbes deems 
necessary. Sensations are caused by the pressure of objects; colours, sounds, etc. are not in the 
objects. The 


- 548 - 



qualities in objects that correspond to our sensations are motions. The first law of motion is 
stated, and is immediately applied to psychology: imagination is a decaying sense, both being 
motions. Imagination when asleep is dreaming; the religions of the gentiles came of not 
distinguishing dreams from waking life. (The rash reader may apply the same argument to the 
Christian religion, but Hobbes is much too cautious to do so himself. ^_) Belief that dreams are 
prophetic is a delusion; so is the belief in witchcraft and in ghosts. 

The succession of our thoughts is not arbitrary, but governed by laws— sometimes those of 
association, sometimes those depending upon a purpose in our thinking. (This is important as 
an application of detenninism to psychology.) 

Hobbes, as might be expected, is an out-and-out nominalist. There is, he says, nothing universal 
but names, and without words we could not conceive any general ideas. Without language, 
there would be no truth or falsehood, for "true" and "false" are attributes of speech. 

He considers geometry the one genuine science so far created. Reasoning is of the nature of 
reckoning, and should start from definitions. But it is necessary to avoid self-contradictory 
notions in definitions, which is not usually done in philosophy. "Incorporeal substance," for 
instance, is nonsense. When it is objected that God is an incorporeal substance, Hobbes has two 
answers: first, that God is not an object of philosophy; second, that many philosophers have 
thought God corporeal. All error in general propositions, he says, comes from absurdity (i.e., 
self-contradiction); he gives as examples of absurdity the idea of free will, and of cheese having 
the accidents of bread. (We kn ow that, according to the Catholic faith, the accidents of bread 
can inhere in a substance that is not bread.) 

In this passage Hobbes shows an old-fashioned rationalism. Kepler had arrived at a general 
proposition: "Planets go round the sun in ellipses"; but other views, such as those of Ptolemy, 
are not logically absurd. Hobbes has not appreciated the use of induction for arriving at general 
laws, in spite of his admiration for Kepler and Galileo. 

As against Plato, Hobbes holds that reason is not innate, but is developed by industry. 

He comes next to a consideration of the passions. "Endeavour" 


* Elsewhere he says that the heathen gods were created by human fear, but that our God is 
the First Mover. 


- 549 - 


may be defined as a small beginning of motion; if towards something, it is desire, and if away 
from something it is aversion. Love is the same as desire, and hate is the same as aversion. We 
call a thing "good" when it is an object of desire, and "bad" when it is an object of aversion. (It 
will be observed that these definitions give no objectivity to "good" and "bad"; if men differ in 
their desires, there is no theoretical method of adjusting their differences.) There are definitions of 
various passions, mostly based on a competitive view of life; for instance, laughter is sudden 
glory. Fear of invisible power, if publicly allowed, is religion; if not allowed, superstition. Thus 
the decision as to what is religion and what superstition rests with the legislator. Felicity involves 
continual progress; it consists in prospering, not in having prospered; there is no such thing as a 
static happiness— excepting, of course, the joys of heaven, which surpass our comprehension. 

Will is nothing but the last appetite or aversion remaining in deliberation. That is to say, will is not 
something different from desire and aversion, but merely the strongest in a case of conflict. This is 
connected, obviously, with Hobbes's denial of free will. 

Unlike most defenders of despotic government, Hobbes holds that all men are naturally equal. In a 
state of nature, before there is any government, every man desires to preserve his own liberty, but 
to acquire dominion over others; both these desires are dictated by the impulse to self- 
preservation. From their conflict arises a war of all against all, which makes life "nasty, brutish, 
and short." In a state of nature, there is no property, no justice or injustice; there is only war, and 
"force and fraud are, in war, the two cardinal virtues." 

The second part tells how men escape from these evils by combining into communities each 
subject to a central authority. This is represented as happening by means of a social contract. It is 
supposed that a number of people come together and agree to choose a sovereign, or a sovereign 
body, which shall exercise authority over them and put an end to the universal war. I do not think 
this "covenant" (as Hobbes usually calls it) is thought of as a definite historical event; it is 
certainly irrelevant to the argument to think of it as such. It is an explanatory myth, used to 
explain why men submit, and should submit, to the limitations on personal freedom entailed in 
submission to authority. The purpose of the restraint men put upon themselves, 


- 550 - 



says Hobbes, is self-preservation from the universal war resulting from our love of liberty for 
ourselves and of dominion over others. 

Hobbes considers the question why men cannot co-operate like ants and bees. Bees in the same 
hive, he says, do not compete; they have no desire for honour; and they do not use reason to 
criticize the government. Their agreement is natural, but that of men can only be artificial, by 
covenant. The covenant must confer power on one man or one assembly, since otherwise it cannot 
be enforced. "Covenants, without the sword, are but words." ( President Wilson unfortunately 
forgot this.) The covenant is not, as afterwards in Locke and Rousseau, between the citizens and 
the ruling power; it is a covenant made by the citizens with each other to obey such ruling power 
as the majority shall choose. When they have chosen, their political power is at an end. The 
minority is as much bound as the majority, since the covenant was to obey the government chosen 
by the majority. When the government has been chosen, the citizens lose all rights except such as 
the government may find it expedient to grant. There is no right of rebellion, because the ruler is 
not bound by any contract, whereas the subjects are. 

A multitude so united is called a commonwealth. This "Leviathan" is a mortal God. 

Hobbes prefers monarchy, but all his abstract arguments are equally applicable to all forms of 
government in which there is one supreme authority not limited by the legal rights of other bodies. 
He could tolerate Parliament alone, but not a system in which governmental power is shared 
between king and Parliament. This is the exact antithesis to the views of Locke and Montesquieu. 
The English Civil War occurred, says Hobbes, because power was divided between King, Lords, 
and Commons. 

The supreme power, whether a man or an assembly, is called the Sovereign. The powers of the 
sovereign, in Hobbes's system, are unlimited. He has the right of censorship over all expression of 
opinion. It is assumed that his main interest is the preservation of internal peace, and that therefore 
he will not use the power of censorship to suppress truth, for a doctrine repugnant to peace cannot 
be true. (A singularly pragmatist view!) The laws of property are to be entirely subject to the 
sovereign; for in a state of nature there is no property, 


- 551 - 



and therefore property is created by government, which may control its creation as it pleases. 

It is admitted that the sovereign may be despotic, but even the worst despotism is better than 
anarchy. Moreover, in many points the interests of the sovereign are identical with those of his 
subjects. He is richer if they are richer, safer if they are law-abiding, and so on. Rebellion is 
wrong, both because it usually fails, and because, if it succeeds, it sets a bad example, and teaches 
others to rebel. The Aristotelian distinction between tyranny and monarchy is rejected; a 
"tyranny," according to Hobbes, is merely a monarchy that the speaker happens to dislike. 

Various reasons are given for preferring government by a monarch to government by an assembly. 
It is admitted that the monarch will usually follow his private interest when it conflicts with that of 
the public, but so will an assembly. A monarch may have favourites, but so may every member of 
an assembly; therefore the total number of favourites is likely to be fewer under a monarchy. A 
monarch can hear advice from anybody secretly; an assembly can only hear advice from its own 
members, and that publicly. In an assembly, the chance absence of some may cause a different 
party to obtain the majority, and thus produce a change of policy. Moreover, if the assembly is 
divided against itself, the result may be civil war. For all these reasons, Hobbes concludes, a 
monarchy is best. 

Throughout the Leviathan, Hobbes never considers the possible effect of periodical elections in 
curbing the tendency of assemblies to sacrifice the public interest to the private interest of their 
members. He seems, in fact, to be thinking, not of democratically elected Parliaments, but of 
bodies like the Grand Council in Venice or the House of Lords in England. He conceives 
democracy, in the manner of antiquity, as involving the direct participation of every citizen in 
legislation and administration; at least, this seems to be his view. 

The part of the people, in Hobbes's system, ends completely with the first choice of a sovereign. 
The succession is to be detennined by the sovereign, as was the practice in the Roman Empire 
when mutinies did not interfere. It is admitted that the sovereign will usually choose one of his 
own children, or a near relative if he has no children, but it is held that no law ought to prevent 
him from choosing otherwise. 

There is a chapter on the liberty of subjects, which begins with an 


- 552 - 



admirably precise definition: Liberty is the absence of external impediments to motion. In this 
sense, liberty is consistent with necessity; for instance, water necessarily flows down hill when 
there are no impediments to its motion, and when, therefore, according to the definition, it is free. 
A man is free to do what he wills, but necessitated to do what God wills. All our volitions have 
causes, and are in this sense necessary. As for the liberty of subjects, they are free where the laws 
do not interfere; this is no limitation of sovereignty, since the laws could interfere if the sovereign 
so decided. Subjects have no right as against the sovereign, except what the sovereign voluntarily 
concedes. When David caused Uriah to be killed, he did no injury to Uriah, because Uriah was his 
subject; but he did an injury to God, because he was God's subject and was disobeying God’s law. 

The ancient authors, with their praises of liberty, have led men, according to Hobbes, to favour 
tumults and seditions. He maintains that, when they are rightly interpreted, the liberty they praised 
was that of sovereigns, i.e., liberty from foreign domination. Internal resistance to sovereigns he 
condemns even when it might seem most justified. For example, he holds that Saint Ambrose had 
no right to excommunicate the Emperor Theodosius after the massacre of Thessalonica. And he 
vehemently censures Pope Zachary for having helped to depose the last of the Merovingians in 
favour of Pepin. 

He admits, however, one limitation on the duty of submission to sovereigns. The right of self- 
preservation he regards as absolute, and subjects have the right of self-defence, even against 
monarchs. This is logical, since he has made self-preservation the motive for instituting 
government. On this ground he holds (though with limitations) that a man has a right to refuse to 
fight when called upon by the government to do so. This is a right which no modem government 
concedes. A curious result of his egoistic ethic is that resistance to the sovereign is only justified 
in self- defence; resistance in defence of another is always culpable. 

There is one other quite logical exception: a man has no duty to a sovereign who has not the 
power to protect him. This justified Hobbes's submission to Cromwell while Charles II was in 
exile. 

There must of course be no such bodies as political parties or what we should now call trade 
unions. All teachers are to be ministers of the sovereign, and are to teach only what the sovereign 
thinks useful. 


- 553 - 



The rights of property are only valid as against other subjects, not as against the sovereign. The 
sovereign has the right to regulate foreign trade. He is not subject to the civil law. His right to 
punish comes to him, not from any concept of justice, but because he retains the liberty that all 
men had in the state of nature, when no man could be blamed for inflicting injury on another. 

There is an interesting list of the reasons (other than foreign conquest) for the dissolution of 
commonwealths. These are: giving too little power to the sovereign; allowing private judgement 
in subjects; the theory that everything that is against conscience is sin; the belief in inspiration; the 
doctrine that the sovereign is subject to civil laws; the recognition of absolute private property; 
division of the sovereign power; imitation of the Greeks and Romans; separation of temporal and 
spiritual powers; refusing the power of taxation to the sovereign; the popularity of potent subjects; 
and the liberty of disputing with the sovereign. Of all these, there were abundant instances in the 
then recent history of England and France. 

There should not, Hobbes thinks, be much difficulty in teaching people to believe in the rights of 
the sovereign, for have they not been taught to believe in Christianity, and even in 
transubstantiation, which is contrary to reason? There should be days set apart for learning the 
duty of submission. The instruction of the people depends upon right teaching in the universities, 
which must therefore be carefully supervised. There must be uniformity of worship, the religion 
being that ordained by the sovereign. 

Part II ends with the hope that some sovereign will read the book and make himself absolute— a 
less chimerical hope than Plato's, that some king would turn philosopher. Monarchs are assured 
that the book is easy reading and quite interesting. 

Part III, "Of a Christian Common-wealth," explains that there is no universal Church, because the 
Church must depend upon the civil government. In each country, the king must be head of the 
Church; the Pope's overlordship and infallibility cannot be admitted. It argues, as might be 
expected, that a Christian who is a subject of a non-Christian sovereign should yield outwardly, 
for was not Naaman suffered to bow himself in the house of Rimrnon? 

Part IV, "Of the Kingdom of Darkness," is mainly concerned with criticism of the Church of 
Rome, which Hobbes hates because it puts 


- 554 - 



the spiritual power above the temporal. The rest of this part is an attack on "vain philosophy," by 
which Aristotle is usually meant. 

Let us now try to decide what we are to think of the Leviathan. The question is not easy, because 
the good and the bad in it are so closely intermingled. 

In politics, there are two different questions, one as to the best form of the State, the other as to its 
powers. The best form of State, according to Hobbes, is monarchy, but this is not the important 
part of his doctrine. The important part is his contention that the powers of the State should be 
absolute. This doctrine, or something like it, had grown up in Western Europe during the 
Renaissance and the Reformation. First, the feudal nobility were cowed by Louis XI, Edward IV, 
Ferdinand and Isabella, and their successors. Then the Reformation, in Protestant countries, 
enabled the lay government to get the better of the Church. Henry VIII wielded a power such as no 
earlier English king had enjoyed. But in France the Reformation, at first, had an opposite effect; 
between the Guises and the Huguenots, the kings were nearly powerless. Henry IV and Richelieu, 
not long before Hobbes wrote, had laid the foundations of the absolute monarchy which lasted in 
France till the Revolution. In Spain, Charles V had got the better of the Cortes, and Philip II was 
absolute except in relation to the Church. In England, however, the Puritans had undone the work 
of Henry VIII; their work suggested to Hobbes that anarchy must result from resistance to the 
sovereign. 

Every community is faced with two dangers, anarchy and despotism. The Puritans, especially the 
Independents, were most impressed by the danger of despotism. Hobbes, on the contrary, was 
obsessed by the fear of anarchy. The liberal philosophers who arose after the Restoration, and 
acquired control after 1688, realized both dangers; they disliked both Strafford and the 
Anabaptists. This led Locke to the doctrine of division of powers, and of checks and balances. In 
England there was a real division of powers so long as the king had influence; then Parliament 
became supreme, and ultimately the Cabinet. In America, there are still checks and balances in so 
far as Congress and the Supreme Court can resist the Administration; but the tendency is towards 
a constant increase in the powers of the Administration. In Gennany, Italy, Russia, and Japan, the 
government has even more power than Hobbes thought desirable. On the 


- 555 - 



whole, therefore, as regards the powers of the State, the world has gone as Hobbes wished, after a 
long liberal period during which, at least apparently, it was moving in the opposite direction. 
Whatever may be the outcome of the present war, it seems evident that the functions of the State 
must continue to increase, and that resistance to it must grow more and more difficult. 

The reason that Hobbes gives for supporting the State, namely that it is the only alternative to 
anarchy, is in the main a valid one. A State may, however, be so bad that temporary anarchy 
seems preferable to its continuance, as in France in 1789 and in Russia in 1917. Moreover the 
tendency of every government towards tyranny cannot be kept in check unless governments have 
some fear of rebellion. Governments would be worse than they are if Hobbes's submissive attitude 
were universally adopted by subjects. This is true in the political sphere, where governments will 
try, if they can, to make themselves personally irremovable; it is true in the economic sphere, 
where they will try to enrich themselves and their friends at the public expense; it is true in the 
intellectual sphere, where they will suppress every new discovery or doctrine that seems to 
menace their power. These are reasons for not thinking only of the risk of anarchy, but also of the 
danger of injustice and ossification that is bound up with omnipotence in government. 

The merits of Hobbes appear most clearly when he is contrasted with earlier political theorists. He 
is completely free from superstition; he does not argue from what happened to Adam and Eve at 
the time of the Fall. He is clear and logical; his ethics, right or wrong, is completely intelligible, 
and does not involve the use of any dubious concepts. Apart from Machiavelli, who is much more 
limited, he is the first really modern writer on political theory. Where he is wrong, he is wrong 
from over-simplification, not because the basis of his thought is unreal and fantastic. For this 
reason, he is still worth refuting. 

Without criticizing Hobbes's metaphysics or ethics, there are two points to make against him. The 
first is that he always considers the national interest as a whole, and assumes, tacitly, that the 
major interests of all citizens are the same. He does not realize the importance of the clash 
between different classes, which Marx makes the chief cause of social change. This is connected 
with the assumption that the interests of a monarch are roughly identical with those of his sub- 


- 556 - 



jects. In time of war there is a unification of interests, especially if the war is fierce; but in time of 
peace the clash may be very great between the interests of one class and those of another. It is not 
by any means always true that, in such a situation, the best way to avert anarchy is to preach the 
absolute power of the sovereign. Some concession in the way of sharing power may be the only 
way to prevent civil war. This should have been obvious to Hobbes from the recent history of 
England. 

Another point in which Hobbes's doctrine is unduly limited is in regard to the relations between 
different States. There is not a word in Leviathan to suggest any relation between them except war 
and conquest, with occasional interludes. This follows, on his principles, from the absence of an 
international government, for the relations of States are still in a state of nature, which is that of a 
war of all against all. So long as there is international anarchy, it is by no means clear that increase 
of efficiency in the separate States is in the interest of mankind, since it increases the ferocity and 
destructiveness of war. Every argument that he adduces in favour of government, in so far as it is 
valid at all, is valid in favour of international government. So long as national States exist and 
fight each other, only inefficiency can preserve the human race. To improve the fighting quality of 
separate States without having any means of preventing war is the road to universal destruction. 

CHAPTER IX Descartes 

RENA% 0 DESCARTES ( 1596-1650) is usually considered the founder of modern philosophy, 
and, I think, rightly. He is the first man of high philosophic capacity whose outlook is profoundly 
affected by the new physics and astronomy. While it is true that he retains much of scholasticism, 
he does not accept foundations laid by predecessors, but endeavours to construct a complete 
philosophic edifice de novo. This had not happened since Aristotle, 

-557- 



and is a sign of the new self-confidence that resulted from the progress of science. There is a 
freshness about his work that is not to be found in any eminent previous philosopher since 
Plato. All the intermediate philosophers were teachers, with the professional superiority 
belonging to that avocation. Descartes writes, not as a teacher, but as a discoverer and explorer, 
anxious to communicate what he has found. His style is easy and unpedantic, addressed to 
intelligent men of the world rather than to pupils. It is, moreover, an extraordinarily excellent 
style. It is very fortunate for modern philosophy that the pioneer had such admirable literary 
sense. His successors, both on the Continent and in England, until Kant, retain his 
unprofessional character, and several of them retain something of his stylistic merit. 

Descartes's father was a councillor of the Parlement of Brittany, and possessed a moderate 
amount of landed property. When Descartes inherited, at his father's death, he sold his estates, 
and invested the money, obtaining an income of six or seven thousand francs a year. He was 
educated, from 1604 to 1612, at the Jesuit college of La FlA'che, which seems to have given 
him a much better grounding in modern mathematics than he could have got at most 
universities at that time. In 1612 he went to Paris, where he found social life boring, and retired 
to a secluded retreat in the Faubourg Saint Germain, in which he worked at geometry. Friends 
nosed him out, however, so, to secure more complete quiet, he enlisted in the Dutch army 
( 1617). As Holland was at peace at the time, he seems to have enjoyed two years of 
undisturbed meditation. However, the coming of the Thirty Years' War led him to enlist in the 
Bavarian army ( 1619). It was in Bavaria, during the winter 1619-70, that he had the experience 
he describes in the Discours de la MAQthode. The weather being cold, he got into a stove fjn 
the morning, and stayed there all day meditating; by his own account, his philosophy was half 
finished when he came out, but this need not be accepted too literally. Socrates used to meditate 
all day in the snow, but Descartes's mind only worked when he was warm. 

In 1621 he gave up fighting; after a visit to Italy, he settled in Paris 


* Descartes says it was a stove ( poA a le ), but most commentators think this impossible. Those 
who know old-fashioned Bavarian houses, however, assure me that it is entirely credible. 


- 558 - 


in 1625. But again friends would call on him before he was up (he seldom got up before midday), 
so in 1628 he joined the army which was besieging La Rochelle, the Huguenot stronghold. When 
this episode was finished, he decided to live in Holland, probably to escape the risk of 
persecution. He was a timid man, a practising Catholic, but he shared Galileo's heresies. Some 
think that he heard of the first (secret) condemnation of Galileo, which had taken place in 1616. 
However that may be, he decided not to publish a great book, Le Monde, upon which he had been 
engaged. His reason was that it maintained two heretical doctrines: the earth’s rotation and the 
infinity of the universe. (This book was never published in its entirey, but fragments of it were 
published after his death.) 

He lived in Holland for twenty years ( 1629-49), except for a few brief visits to France and one to 
England, all on business. It is impossible to exaggerate the importance of Holland in the 
seventeenth century, as the one country where there was freedom of speculation. Hobbes had to 
have his books printed there; Locke took refuge there during the five worst years of reaction in 
England before 1688; Bayle (of the Dictionary) found it necessary to live there; and Spinoza 
would hardly have been allowed to do his work in any other country. 

I said that Descartes was a timid man, but perhaps it would be kinder to say that he wished to be 
left in peace so as to do his work undisturbed. He always courted ecclesiastics, especially Jesuits— 
not only while he was in their power, but after his emigration to Holland. His psychology is 
obscure, but I incline to think that he was a sincere Catholic, and wished to persuade the Church- 
in its own interests as well as in his— to be less hostile to modern science than it showed itself in 
the case of Galileo. There are those who think that his orthodoxy was merely politic, but though 
this is a possible view I do not thi nk it the most probable. 

Even in Holland he was subject to vexatious attacks, not by the Roman Church, but by Protestant 
bigots. It was said that his views led to atheism, and he would have been prosecuted but for the 
intervention of the French ambassador and the Prince of Orange. This attack having failed, 
another, less direct, was made a few years later by the authorities of the University of Leyden, 
which forbade all mention of him, whether favourable or unfavourable. Again the 


- 559 - 



Prince of Orange intervened, and told the university not to be silly. This illustrates the gain to 
Protestant countries from the subordination of the Church to the State, and from the comparative 
weakness of Churches that were not international. 

Unfortunately, through Chanut, the French ambassador at Stockholm, Descartes got into 
correspondence with Queen Christina of Swed.en, a passionate and learned lady who thought that, 
as a sovereign, she had a right to waste the time of great men. He sent her a treatise on love, a 
subject which until then he had somewhat neglected. He also sent her a work on the passions of 
the soul, which he had originally composed for Princess Elizabeth, daughter of the Elector 
Palatine. These writings led her to request his presence at her court; he at last agreed, and she sent 
a warship to fetch him ( September 1649). It turned out that she wanted daily lessons from him, 
but could not spare the time except at five in the morning. This unaccustomed early rising, in the 
cold of a Scandinavian winter, was not the best thing for a delicate man. Moreover Chanut 
became dangerously ill, and Descartes looked after him. The ambassador recovered, but Descartes 
fell ill and died in February 1650. 

Descartes never married, but he had a natural daughter who died at the age of five; this was, he 
said, the greatest sorrow of his life. He always was well dressed, and wore a sword. He was not 
industrious; he worked short hours, and read little. When he went to Holland he took few books 
with him, but among them were the Bible and Thomas Aquinas. His work seems to have been 
done with great concentration during short periods; but perhaps, to keep up the appearance of a 
gentlemanly amateur, he may have pretended to work less than in fact he did, for otherwise his 
achievements seem scarcely credible. 

Descartes was a philosopher, a mathematician, and a man of science. In philosophy and 
mathematics, his work was of supreme importance; in science, though creditable, it was not so 
good as that of some of his contemporaries. 

His great contribution to geometry was the invention of co-ordinate geometry, though not quite in 
its final form. He used the analytic method, which supposes a problem solved, and examines the 
consequences of the supposition; and he applied algebra to geometry. In both of these he had had 
predecessors— as regards the former, even 


- 560 - 



among the ancients. What was original in him was the use of coordinates, i.e., the determination 
of the position of a point in a plane by its distance from two fixed lines. He did not himself 
discover all the power of this method, but he did enough to make further progress easy. This was 
by no means his sole contribution to mathematics, but it was his most important. 

The book in which he set forth most of his scientific theories was Principia Philosophiae, 
published in 1644. There were however some other books of importance: Essais philosophiques 
( 1637) deals with optics as well as geometry, and one of his books is called De la formation du 
foetus. He welcomed Harvey's discovery of the circulation of the blood, and was always hoping 
(though in vain) to make some discovery of importance in medicine. He regarded the bodies of 
men and animals as machines; animals he regarded as automata, governed entirely by the laws of 
physics, and devoid of feeling or consciousness. Men are different: they have a soul, which resides 
in the pineal gland. There the soul comes in contact with the "vital spirits," and through this 
contact there is interaction between soul and body. The total quantity of motion in the universe is 
constant, and therefore the soul cannot affect it; but it can alter the direction of motion of the 
animal spirits, and hence, indirectly, of other parts of the body. 

This part of his theory was abandoned by his school— first by his Dutch disciple Geulincx, and 
later by Malebranche and Spinoza. The physicists discovered the conservation of momentum, 
according to which the total quantity of motion in the world in any given direction is constant. 

This showed that the sort of action of mind on matter that Descartes imagined is impossible. 
Assuming— as was very generally assumed in the Cartesian school— that all physical action is of 
the nature of impact, dynamical laws suffice to detennine the motions of matter, and there is no 
room for any influence of mind. But this raises a difficulty. My arm moves when I will that it shall 
move, but my will is a mental phenomenon and the motion of my ann a physical phenomenon. 
Why then, if mind and matter cannot interact, does my body behave as if my mind controlled it? 
To this Geulincx invented an answer, known as the theory of the "two clocks." Suppose you have 
two clocks which both keep perfect time: whenever one points to the hour, the other will strike, so 
that if you saw one and heard the other, you would think the one caused the other to strike. So it 


- 561 - 



is with mind and body. Each is wound up by God to keep time with the other, so that, on occasion 
of my volition, purely physical laws cause my arm to move, although my will has not really acted 
on my body. 

There were of course difficulties in this theory. In the first place, it was very odd; in the second 
place, since the physical series was rigidly detennined by natural laws, the mental series, which 
ran parallel to it, must be equally deterministic. If the theory was valid, there should be a sort of 
possible dictionary, in which each cerebral occurrence would be translated into the corresponding 
mental occurrence. An ideal calculator could calculate the cerebral occurrence by the laws of 
dynamics, and infer the concomitant mental occurrence by means of the "dictionary." Even 
without the "dictionary," the calculator could infer any words and actions, since these are bodily 
movements. This view would be difficult to reconcile with Christian ethics and the punishment of 
sin. 

These consequences, however, were not at once apparent. The theory appeared to have two merits. 
The first was that it made the soul, in a sense, wholly independent of the body, since it was never 
acted on by the body. The second was that it allowed the general principle: "one substance cannot 
act on another." There were two substances, mind and matter, and they were so dissimilar that an 
interaction seemed inconceivable. Geulincx's theory explained the appearance of interaction 
while denying its reality. 

In mechanics, Descartes accepts the first law of motion, according to which a body left to itself 
will move with constant velocity in a straight line. But there is no action at a distance, as later in 
Newton's theory of gravitation. There is no such thing as a vacuum, and there are no atoms; yet all 
interaction is of the nature of impact. If we knew enough, we should be able to reduce chemistry 
and biology to mechanics; the process by which a seed develops into an animal or a plant is purely 
mechanical. There is no need of Aristotle's three souls; only one of them, the rational soul, exists, 
and that only in man. 

With due caution to avoid theological censure, Descartes develops a cosmogony not unlike those 
of some pre-Platonic philosophers. We know, he says, that the world was created as in Genesis, 
but it is interesting to see how it might have grown naturally. He works out a theory of the 
formation of vortices: round the sun there is an immense 


- 562 - 



vortex in the plenum, which carries the planets round with it. The theory is ingenious, but cannot 
explain why planetary orbits are elliptical, not circular. It was generally accepted in France, where 
it was only gradually ousted by the Newtonian theory. Cotes, the editor of the first English edition 
of Newton’s Principia, argues eloquently that the vortex theory leads to atheism, while Newton's 
requires God to set the planets in motion in a direction not towards the sun. On this ground, he 
thinks, Newton is to be preferred. 

1 come now to Descartes's two most important books, so far as pure philosophy is concerned. 
These are the Discourse on Method ( 1637) and the Meditations ( 1642). They largely overlap, and 
it is not necessary to keep them apart. 

In these books Descartes begins by explaining the method of "Cartesian doubt," as it has come to 
be called. In order to have a firm basis for his philosophy, he resolves to make himself doubt 
everything that he can manage to doubt. As he foresees that the process may take some time, he 
resolves, in the meanwhile, to regulate his conduct by commonly received rules; this will leave his 
mind unhampered by the possible consequences of his doubts in relation to practice. 

He begins with scepticism in regard to the senses. Can I doubt, he says, that I am sitting here by 
the fire in a dressing-gown? Yes, for sometimes I have dreamt that I was here when in fact I was 
naked in bed. (Pyjamas, and even nightshirts, had not yet been invented.) Moreover madmen 
sometimes have hallucinations, so it is possible that I may be in like case. 

Dreams, however, like painters, present us with copies of real things, at least as regards their 
elements. (You may dream of a winged horse, but only because you have seen horses and wings.) 
Therefore corporeal nature in general, involving such matters as extension, magnitude, and 
number, is less easy to question than beliefs about particular things. Arithmetic and geometry, 
which are not concerned with particular things, are therefore more certain than physics and 
astronomy; they are true even of dream objects, which do not differ from real ones as regards 
number and extension. Even in regard to arithmetic and geometry, however, doubt is possible. It 
may be that God causes me to make mistakes whenever I try to count the sides of a square or add 

2 to 3. Perhaps it is wrong, even in imagination, to attribute such u nk indness to God, but there 
might be an evil demon, no less cunning and deceit- 


- 563 - 



ful than powerful employing all his industry in misleading me. If there be such a demon, it may 
be that all the things I see are only illusions of which he makes use as traps for my credulity. 

There remains, however, something that I cannot doubt: no demon, however cunning, could 
deceive me if I did not exist. I may have no body, this might be an illusion. But thought is 
different. "While I wanted to think everything false, it must necessarily be that I who thought 
was something; and remarking that this truth, I think, therefore I am, was so solid and so certain 
that all the most extravagant suppositions of the sceptics were incapable of upsetting it, I judged 
that I could receive it without scruple as the first principle of the philosophy that I sought." f 

This passage is the kernel of Descartes's theory of knowledge, and contains what is most 
important in his philosophy. Most philosophers since Descartes have attached importance to the 
theory of knowledge, and their doing so is largely due to him. "I think, therefore I am" makes 
mind more certain than matter, and my mind (for me) more certain than the minds of others. 
There is thus, in all philosophy derived from Descartes, a tendency to subjectivism, and to 
regarding matter as something only knowable, if at all, by inference from what is known of 
mind. These two tendencies exist both in Continental idealism and in British empiricism— in the 
former triumphantly, in the latter regretfully. There has been, in quite recent times, an attempt 
to escape from this subjectivism by the philosophy known as instrumentalism, but of this I will 
not speak at present. With this exception, modern philosophy has very largely accepted the 
formulation of its problems from Descartes, while not accepting his solutions. 

The reader will remember that Saint Augustine advanced an argument closely similar to the 
cogito. He did not, however, give prominence to it, and the problem which it is intended to 
solve occupied only a small part of his thoughts. Descartes's originality, therefore, should be 
admitted, though it consists less in inventing the argument than in perceiving its importance. 

Having now secured a firm foundation, Descartes sets to work to rebuild the edifice of 
knowledge. The I that has been proved to exist 


* The above argument, "I think, therefore I am" ( cogito ergo sum), is known as Descartes's 
cogito, and the process by which it is reached is cared "Cartesian doubt." 


- 564 - 


has been inferred from the fact that I think, therefore I exist while I think, and only then. If I 
ceased to think, there would be no evidence of my existence. I am a thing that thinks, a substance 
of which the whole nature or essence consists in thinking, and which needs no place or material 
thing for its existence. The soul, therefore, is wholly distinct from the body and easier to know 
than the body; it would be what it is even if there were no body. 

Descartes next asks himself: why is the cogito so evident? He concludes that it is only because it 
is clear and distinct. He therefore adopts as a general rule the principle: All things that we 
conceive very clearly and very distinctly are true. He admits, however, that there is sometimes 
difficulty in knowing which these things are. 

"Thinking" is used by Descartes in a very wide sense. A thing that thinks, he says, is one that 
doubts, understands, conceives, affirms, denies, wills, imagines, and feels— for feeling, as it occurs 
in dreams, is a form of thinking. Since thought is the essence of mind, the mind must always 
think, even during deep sleep. 

Descartes now resumes the question of our knowledge of bodies. He takes as an example a piece 
of wax from the honeycomb. Certain things are apparent to the senses: it tastes of honey, it smells 
of flowers, it has a certain sensible colour, size and shape, it is hard and cold, and if struck it emits 
a sound. But if you put it near the fire, these qualities change, although the wax persists; therefore 
what appeared to the senses was not the wax itself. The wax itself is constituted by extension, 
flexibility, and motion, which are understood by the mind, not by the imagination. The thing that 
is the wax cannot itself be sensible, since it is equally involved in all the appearances of the wax 
to the various senses. The perception of the wax "is not a vision or touch or imagination, but an 
inspection of the mind." I do not see the wax, any more than I see men in the street when I see hats 
and coats. "I understand by the sole power of judgement, which resides in my mind, what I 
thought I saw with my eyes." Knowledge by the senses is confused, and shared with animals; but 
now I have stripped the wax of its clothes, and mentally perceive it naked. From my sensibly 
seeing the wax, my own existence follows with certainty, but not that of the wax. Knowledge of 
external things must be by the mind, not by the senses. 

This leads to a consideration of different kinds of ideas. The commonest of errors, Descartes says, 
is to think that my ideas are like out- 


- 565 - 



side things. (The word "idea" includes sense-perceptions, as used by Descartes.) Ideas seem to be 
of three sorts: (1) those that are innate, (2) those that are foreign and come from without, (3) those 
that are invented by me. The second kind of ideas, we naturally suppose, are like outside objects. 
We suppose this, partly because nature teaches us to think so, partly because such ideas come 
independently of the will (i.e., through sensation), and it therefore seems reasonable to suppose 
that a foreign thing imprints its likeness on me. But are these good reasons? When I speak of 
being "taught by nature" in this connection, I only mean that I have a certain inclination to believe 
it, not that I see it by a natural light. What is seen by a natural light cannot be denied, but a mere 
inclination may be towards what is false. And as for ideas of sense being involuntary, that is no 
argument, for dreams are involuntary although they come from within. The reasons for supposing 
that ideas of sense come from without are therefore inconclusive. 

Moreover there are sometimes two different ideas of the same external object, e.g., the sun as it 
appears to the senses and the sun in which the astronomers believe. These cannot both be like the 
sun, and reason shows that the one which comes directly from experience must be the less like it 
of the two. 

But these considerations have not disposed of the sceptical arguments which threw doubt on the 
existence of the external world. This can only be done by first proving the existence of God. 

Descartes's proofs of the existence of God are not very original; in the main they come from 
scholastic philosophy. They were better stated by Leibniz, and I will omit consideration of them 
until we come to him. 

When God’s existence has been proved, the rest proceeds easily. Since God is good, He will not 
act like the deceitful demon whom Descartes has imagined as a ground for doubt. Now God has 
given me such a strong inclination to believe in bodies that He would be deceitful if there were 
none; therefore bodies exist. He must, moreover, have given me the faculty of correcting errors. I 
use this faculty when I employ the principle that what is clear and distinct is true. This enables me 
to know mathematics, and physics also, if I remember that I must know the truth about bodies by 
the mind alone, not by mind and body jointly. 

The constructive part of Descartes's theory of knowledge is much 


- 566 - 



less interesting than the earlier destructive part. It uses all sorts of scholastic maxims, such as that 
an effect can never have more perfection than its cause, which have somehow escaped the initial 
critical scrutiny. No reason is given for accepting these maxims, although they are certainly less 
self-evident than one's own existence, which is proved with a flourish of trumpets. Plato's 
Theaetetus, Saint Augustine, and Saint Thomas contain most of what is affirmative in the 
Meditations. 

The method of critical doubt, though Descartes himself applied it only half-heartedly, was of great 
philosophic importance. It is clear, as a matter of logic, that it can only yield positive results if 
scepticism is to stop somewhere. If there is to be both logical and empirical knowledge, there 
must be two kinds of stopping points: indubitable facts, and indubitable principles of inference. 
Descartes's indubitable facts are his own thoughts— using "thought" in the widest possible sense. "I 
think" is his ultimate premiss. Here the word "I" is really illegitimate; he ought to state his 
ultimate premiss in the fonn "there are thoughts." The word "I" is grammatically convenient, but 
does not describe a datum. When he goes on to say "I am a thing which thinks," he is already 
using uncritically the apparatus of categories handed down by scholasticism. He nowhere proves 
that thoughts need a thinker, nor is there reason to believe this except in a grammatical sense. The 
decision, however, to regard thoughts rather than external objects as the prime empirical 
certainties was very important, and had a profound effect on all subsequent philosophy. 

In two other respects the philosophy of Descartes was important. First: it brought to completion, 
or very nearly to completion, the dualism of mind and matter which began with Plato and was 
developed, largely for religious reasons, by Christian philosophy. Ignoring the curious transactions 
in the pineal gland, which were dropped by the followers of Descartes, the Cartesian system 
presents two parallel but independent worlds, that of mind and that of matter, each of which can 
be studied without reference to the other. That the mind does not move the body was a new idea, 
due explicitly to Geulincx but implicitly to Descartes. It had the advantage of making it possible 
to say that the body does not move the mind. There is a considerable discussion in the Meditations 
as to why the mind feels "sorrow" when the body is thirsty. The correct Cartesian answer was that 
the body and the mind were like two clocks, and that when one indicated "thirst" the other 


- 567 - 



indicated "sorrow." From the religious point of view, however, there was a grave drawback to this 
theory; and this brings me to the second characteristic of Cartesianism that I alluded to above. 

In the whole theory of the material world, Cartesianism was rigidly deterministic. Living 
organisms, just as much as dead matter, were governed by the laws of physics; there was no 
longer need, as in the Aristotelian philosophy, of an entelechy or soul to explain the growth of 
organisms and the movements of animals. Descartes himself allowed one small exception: a 
human soul could, by volition, alter the direction though not the quantity of the motion of the 
animal spirits. This, however, was contrary to the spirit of the system, and turned out to be 
contrary to the laws of mechanics; it was therefore dropped. The consequence was that all the 
movements of matter were detennined by physical laws, and, owing to parallelism, mental events 
must be equally determinate. Consequently Cartesians had difficulty about free will. And for those 
who paid more attention to Descartes's science than to his theory of knowledge, it was not difficult 
to extend the theory that animals are automata: why not say the same of man, and simplify the 
system by making it a consistent materialism? This step was actually taken in the eighteenth 
century. 

There is in Descartes an unresolved dualism between what he learnt from contemporary science 
and the scholasticism that he had been taught at La FlA'che. This led him into inconsistencies, but 
it also made him more rich in fruitful ideas than any completely logical philosopher could have 
been. Consistency might have made him merely the founder of a new scholasticism, whereas 
inconsistency made him the source of two important but divergent schools of philosophy. 

-568- 

CHAPTER X Spinoza 

Spinoza ( 1634-77) is the noblest and most lovable of the great philosophers. Intellectually, some 
others have surpassed him, but ethically he is supreme. As a natural consequence, he was 
considered, during his lifetime and for a century after his death, a man of appalling wickedness. 

He was born a Jew, but the Jews excommunicated him. Christians abhorred him equally; although 
his whole philosophy is dominated by the idea of God, the orthodox accused him of atheism. 
Leibniz, who owed much to him, concealed his debt, and carefully abstained from saying a word 
in his praise; he even went so far as to lie about the extent of his personal acquaintance with the 
heretic Jew. 

The life of Spinoza was very simple. His family had come to Holland from Spain, or perhaps 
Portugal, to escape the Inquisition. He himself was educated in Jewish learning, but found it 
impossible to remain orthodox. He was offered 1000 florins a year to conceal his doubts; when he 
refused, an attempt was made to assassinate him; when this failed, he was cursed with all the 
curses in Deuteronomy and with the curse that Elisha pronounced on the children who, in 
consequence, were torn to pieces by the she-bears. But no she-bears attacked Spinoza. He lived 
quietly, first at Amsterdam and then at the Hague, making his living by polishing lenses. His 
wants were few and simple, and he showed throughout his life a rare indifference to money. The 
few who knew him loved him, even if they disapproved of his principles. The Dutch government, 
with its usual liberalism, tolerated his opinions on theological matters, though at one time he was 
in bad odour politically because he sided with the De Witts against the House of Orange. At the 
early age of forty-three he died of phthisis. 

His chief work, the Ethics, was published posthumously. Before considering it, a few words must 
be said about two of his other books, 


- 569 - 



the Tractatus Theologico-Politicus and the Tractatus Politicus. The fonner is a curious 
combination of biblical criticism and political theory; the latter deals with political theory only. In 
biblical criticism Spinoza partially anticipates modern views, particularly in assigning much later 
dates to various books of the Old Testament than those assigned by tradition. He endeavours 
throughout to show that the Scriptures can be interpreted so as to be compatible with a liberal 
theology. 

Spinoza's political theory is, in the main, derived from Hobbes, in spite of the enormous 
temperamental difference between the two men. He holds that in a state of nature there is no right 
or wrong, for wrong consists in disobeying the law. He holds that the sovereign can do no wrong, 
and agrees with Hobbes that the Church should be entirely subordinate to the State. He is opposed 
to all rebellion, even against a bad government, and instances the troubles in England as a proof of 
the harm that comes of forcible resistance to authority. But he disagrees with Hobbes in thinking 
democracy the "most natural" form of government. He disagrees also in holding that subjects 
should not sacrifice all their rights to the sovereign. In particular, he holds freedom of opinion 
important. I do not quite know how he reconciles this with the opinion that religious questions 
should be decided by the State. I think when he says this he means that they should be decided by 
the State rather than the Church; in Holland the State was much more tolerant than the Church. 

Spinoza Ethics deals with three distinct matters. It begins with metaphysics; it then goes on to the 
psychology of the passions and the will; and finally it sets forth an ethic based on the preceding 
metaphysics and psychology. The metaphysic is a modification of Descartes, the psychology is 
reminiscent of Hobbes, but the ethic is original, and is what is of most value in the book. The 
relation of Spinoza to Descartes is in some ways not unlike the relation of Plotinus to Plato. 
Descartes was a many-sided man, full of intellectual curiosity, but not much burdened with moral 
earnestness. Although he invented "proofs" intended to support orthodox beliefs, he could have 
been used by sceptics as Carneades used Plato. Spinoza, although he was not without scientific 
interests, and even wrote a treatise on the rainbow, was in the main concerned with religion and 
virtue. He accepted from Descartes and his contemporaries a materialistic and detenninis- 


- 570 - 



tic physics, and sought, within this framework, to find room for reverence and a life devoted to the 
Good. His attempt was magnificent, and rouses admiration even in those who do not think it 
successful. 

The metaphysical system of Spinoza is of the type inaugurated by Parmenides. There is only one 
substance, "God or Nature"; nothing finite is self-subsistent. Descartes admitted three substances, 
God and mind and matter; it is true that, even for him, God was, in a sense, more substantial than 
mind and matter, since He had created them, and could, if He chose, annihilate them. But except 
in relation to God's omnipotence, mind and matter were two independent substances, defined, 
respectively, by the attributes of thought and extension. Spinoza would have none of this. For him, 
thought and extension were both attributes of God. God has also an infinite number of other 
attributes, since He must be in every respect infinite; but these others are unknown to us. 
Individual souls and separate pieces of matter are, for Spinoza, adjectival; they are not things, but 
merely aspects of the divine Being. There can be no such personal immortality as Christians 
believe in, but only that impersonal sort that consists in becoming more and more one with God. 
Finite things are defined by their boundaries, physical or logical, that is to say, by what they are 
not\ "all detennination is negation." There can be only one Being who is wholly positive, and He 
must be absolutely infinite. Hence Spinoza is led to a complete and undiluted pantheism. 

Everything, according to Spinoza, is ruled by an absolute logical necessity. There is no such thing 
as free will in the mental sphere or chance in the physical world. Everything that happens is a 
manifesttion of God’s inscrutable nature, and it is logically impossible that events should be other 
than they are. This leads to difficulties in regard to sin, which critics were not slow to point out. 
One of them, observing that, according to Spinoza, everything is decreed by God and is therefore 
good, asks indignantly: Was it good that Nero should kill his mother? Was it good that Adam ate 
the apple? Spinoza answers that what was positive in these acts was good, and only what was 
negative was bad; but negation exists only from the point of view of finite creatures. In God, who 
alone is completely real, there is no negation, and therefore the evil in what to us seem sins does 
not exist when they are viewed as parts of the whole. This doctrine, though, in one fonn or 
another, it has been held by most mystics, cannot, obviously, be 


- 571 - 



reconciled with the orthodox doctrine of sin and damnation. It is bound up with Spinoza's 
complete rejection of free will. Although not at all polemical, Spinoza was too honest to conceal 
his opinions, however shocking to contemporaries; the abhorrence of his teaching is therefore not 
surprising. 

The Ethics is set forth in the style of Euclid, with definitions, axioms, and theorems; everything 
after the axioms is supposed to be rigorously demonstrated by deductive argument. This makes 
him difficult reading. A modern student, who cannot suppose that there are rigorous "proofs" of 
such things as he professes to establish, is bound to grow impatient with the detail of the 
demonstrations, which is, in fact, not worth mastering. It is enough to read the enunciations of the 
propositions, and to study the scholia, which contain much of what is best in the Ethics. But it 
would show a lack of understanding to blame Spinoza for his geometrical method. It was of the 
essence of his system, ethically as well as metaphysically, to maintain that everything could be 
demonstrated, and it was therefore essential to produce demonstrations. We cannot accept his 
method, but that is because we cannot accept his metaphysic. We cannot believe that the 
interconnections of the parts of the universe are logical, because we hold that scientific laws are to 
be discovered by observation, not by reasoning alone. But for Spinoza the geometrical method 
was necessary, and was bound up with the most essential parts of his doctrine. 

I come now to Spinoza's theory of the emotions. This comes after a metaphysical discussion of the 
nature and origin of the mind, which leads up to the astonishing proposition that "the human mind 
has an adequate knowledge of the eternal and infinite essence of God." But the passions, which 
are discussed in the Third Book of the Ethics, distract us and obscure our intellectual vision of the 
whole. "Everything," we are told, "in so far as it is in itself, endeavours to persevere in its own 
being." Hence arise love and hate and strife. The psychology of Book III is entirely egoistic. "He 
who conceives that the object of his hate is destroyed will feel pleasure." "If we conceive that 
anyone takes delight in something, which only one person can possess, we shall endeavour to 
bring it about, that the man in question shall not gain possession thereof." But even in this Book 
there are moments when Spinoza abandons the appearance of mathematically demonstrated 
cynicism, as when he says: "Hatred is increased by being recip- 


- 572 - 



rocated, and can on the other hand be destroyed by love." Self-preservation is the fundamental 
motive of the passions, according to Spinoza; but self-preservation alters its character when we 
realize that what is real and positive in us is what unites us to the whole, and not what preserves 
the appearance of separateness. 

The last two books of the Ethics, entitled respectively "Of human bondage, or the strength of the 
emotions" and "Of the power of the understanding, or of human freedom," are the most 
interesting. We are in bondage in proportion as what happens to us is detennined by outside 
causes, and we are free in proportion as we are self-determined. Spinoza, like Socrates and Plato, 
believes that all wrong action is due to intellectual error: the man who adequately understands his 
own circumstances will act wisely, and will even be happy in the face of what to another would be 
misfortune. He makes no appeal to unselfishness; he holds that self-seeking, in some sense, and 
more particularly self-preservation, govern all human behaviour. "No virtue can be conceived as 
prior to this endeavour to preserve one's own being." But his conception of what a wise man will 
choose as the goal of his self-seeking is different from that of the ordinary egoist: "The mind's 
highest good is the knowledge of God, and the mind's highest virtue is to know God." Emotions 
are called "passions" when they spring from inadequate ideas; passions in different men may 
conflict, but men who live in obedience to reason will agree together. Pleasure in itself is good, 
but hope and fear are bad, and so are humility and repentance: "he who repents of an action is 
doubly wretched or infirm." Spinoza regards time as unreal, and therefore all emotions which have 
to do essentially with an event as future or as past are contrary to reason. "In so far as the mind 
conceives a thing under the dictate of reason, it is affected equally, whether the idea be of a thing 
present, past, or future." 

This is a hard saying, but it is of the essence of Spinoza's system, and we shall do well to dwell 
upon it for a moment. In popular estimation, "all's well that ends well"; if the universe is gradually 
improving, we think better of it than if it is gradually deteriorating, even if the sum of good and 
evil be the same in the two cases. We are more concerned about a disaster in our own time than in 
the time of Genghis Khan. According to Spinoza, this is irrational. Whatever happens is part of 
the eternal timeless world as God sees it; to Him, the date is 


- 573 - 



irrelevant. The wise man, so far as human finitudc allows, endeavours to see the world as God 
sees it, sub specie A\ternitatis, under the aspect of eternity. But, you may retort, we are surely right 
in being more concerned about future misfortunes, which may possibly be averted, than about past 
calamities about which we can do nothing. To this argument Spinoza's determinism supplies the 
answer. Only ignorance makes us think that we can alter the future; what will be will be, and the 
future is as unalterably fixed as the past. That is why hope and fear are condemned: both depend 
upon viewing the future as uncertain, and therefore spring from lack of wisdom. 

When we acquire, in so far as we can, a vision of the world which is analogous to God’s, we see 
everything as part of the whole, and as necessary to the goodness of the whole. Therefore "the 
knowledge of evil is an inadequate knowledge." God has no knowledge of evil, because there is 
no evil to be known; the appearance of evil only arises through regarding parts of the universe as 
if they were self-subsistent. 

Spinoza's outlook is intended to liberate men from the tyranny of fear. "A free man thinks of 
nothing less than of death; and his wisdom is a meditation not of death, but of life." Spinoza lived 
up to this precept very completely. On the last day of his life he was entirely calm, not exalted, 
like Socrates in the Phaedo, but conversing, as he would on any other day, about matters of 
interest to his interlocutor. Unlike some other philosophers, he not only believed his own 
doctrines, but practised them; I do not know of any occasion, in spite of great provocation, in 
which he was betrayed into the kind of heat or anger that his ethic condemned. In controversy he 
was courteous and reasonable, never denouncing, but doing his utmost to persuade. 

In so far as what happens to us springs from ourselves, it is good; only what comes from without 
is bad for us. "As all things whereof a man is the efficient cause are necessarily good, no evil can 
befall a man except through external causes." Obviously, therefore, nothing bad can happen to the 
universe as a whole, since it is not subject to external causes. "We are a part of universal nature, 
and we follow her order. If we have a clear and distinct understanding of this, that part of our 
nature which is defined by intelligence, in other words the better part of ourselves, will assuredly 
acquiesce in what befalls us, and in such acquiescence will endeavour to persist." In so far as a 
man is an unwilling part of a larger whole, he is in bondage; but in so far as, through 


- 574 - 



the understanding, he has grasped the sole reality of the whole, he is free. The implications of this 
doctrine are developed in the last Book of the Ethics. 

Spinoza does not, like the Stoics, object to all emotions; he objects only to those that are 
"passions," i.e., those in which we appear to ourselves to be passive in the power of outside forces. 
"An emotion which is a passion ceases to be a passion as soon as we form a clear and distinct idea 
of it." Understanding that all things are necessary helps the mind to acquire power over the 
emotions. "He who clearly and distinctly understands himself and his emotions, loves God, and so 
much the more as he more understands himself and his emotions." This proposition introduces us 
to the "intellectual love of God," in which wisdom consists. The intellectual love of God is a 
union of thought and emotion: it consists, I think one may say, in true thought combined with joy 
in the apprehension of truth. All joy in true thought is part of the intellectual love of God, for it 
contains nothing negative, and is therefore truly part of the whole, not only apparently, as are 
fragmentary things so separated in thought as to appear bad. 

I said a moment ago that the intellectual love of God involves joy, but perhaps this was a mistake, 
for Spinoza says that God is not affected by any emotion of pleasure or pain, and also says that 
"the intellectual love of the mind towards God is part of the infinite love wherewith God loves 
himself." I think, nevertheless, that there is something in "intellectual love " which is not mere 
intellect; perhaps the joy involved is considered as something superior to pleasure. 

"Love towards God," we are told, "must hold the chief place in the mind." I have omitted 
Spinoza's demonstrations, but in so doing I have given an incomplete picture of his thought. As 
the proof of the above proposition is short, I will quote it in full; the reader can then in 
imagination supply proofs to other propositions. The proof of the above proposition is as follows: 

"For this love is associated with all the modifications of the body (V, 14) and is fostered by them 
all (V, 15); therefore (V, 1 1) it must hold the chief place in the mind. Q.E.D." 

Of the propositions referred to in the above proof, V, 14 states: "The mind can bring it about, that 
all bodily modifications or images of things may be referred to the idea of God"; V, 15, quoted 
above, states: "He who clearly and distinctly understands himself and his 


- 575 - 



emotions loves God, and so much the more in proportion as he understands himself and his 
emotions"; V, 1 1 states: "In proportion as a mental image is referred to more objects, so is it more 
frequent, or more often vivid, and occupies the mind more." 

The "proof' quoted above might be expressed as follows: Every increase in the understanding of 
what happens to us consists in referring events to the idea of God, since, in truth, everything is 
part of God. This understanding of everything as part of God is love of God. When all objects are 
referred to God, the idea of God will fully occupy the mind. 

Thus the statement that "love of God must hold the chief place in the mind" is not a primarily 
moral exhortation, but an account of what must inevitably happen as we acquire understanding. 

We are told that no one can hate God, but, on the other hand, "he who loves God cannot 
endeavour that God should love him in return." Goethe, who admired Spinoza without even 
beginning to understand him, thought this proposition an instance of self-abnegation. It is nothing 
of the sort, but a logical consequence of Spinoza's metaphysic. He does not say that a man ought 
not to want God to love him; he says that a man who loves God cannot want God to love him. 
This is made plain by the proof, which says: "For, if a man shall so endeavour, he would desire 
(V, 17, Corol.) that God, whom he loves, should not be God, and consequently he would desire to 
feel pain (III, 19), which is absurd (III, 28)." V, 17 is the proposition already referred to, which 
says that God has no passions or pleasures or pains; the corollary referred to above deduces that 
God loves and hates no one. Here again what is involved is not an ethical precept, but a logical 
necessity: a man who loved God and wished God to love him would be wishing to feel pain, 
"which is absurd." 

The statement that God can love no one should not be considered to contradict the statement that 
God loves Himself with an infinite intellectual love. He may love Himself, since that is possible 
without false belief; and in any case intellectual love is a very special kind of love. 

At this point Spinoza tells us that he has now given us "all the remedies against the emotions." 
The great remedy is clear and distinct ideas as to the nature of the emotions and their relation to 
external causes. There is a further advantage in love of God as compared to love of 


- 576 - 



human beings: "Spiritual unhealthiness and misfortunes can generally be traced to excessive love 
of something which is subject to many variations." But clear and distinct knowledge "begets a 
love towards a thing immutable and eternal," and such love has not the turbulent and disquieting 
character of love for an object which is transient and changeable. 

Although personal survival after death is an illusion, there is nevertheless something in the human 
mind that is eternal. The mind can only imagine or remember while the body endures, but there is 
in God an idea which expresses the essence of this or that human body under the form of eternity, 
and this idea is the eternal part of the mind. The intellectual love of God, when experienced by an 
individual, is contained in this eternal part of the mind. 

Blessedness, which consists of love towards God, is not the reward of virtue, but virtue itself; we 
do not rejoice in it because we control our lusts, but we control our lusts because we rejoice in it. 

The Ethics ends with these words: 

"The wise man, in so far as he is regarded as such, is scarcely at all disturbed in spirit, but being 
conscious of himself, and of God, and of things, by a certain eternal necessity, never ceases to be, 
but always possesses true acquiescence of his spirit. If the way which I have pointed out as leading 
to this result seems exceedingly hard, it may nevertheless be discovered. Needs must it be hard, 
since it is so seldom found. How would it be possible, if salvation were ready to our hand, and 
could without great labour be found, that it should be by almost all men neglected? But all 
excellent things are as difficult as they are rare." 

In forming a critical estimate of Spinoza's importance as a philosopher, it is necessary to 
distinguish his ethics from his metaphysics, and to consider how much of the former can survive 
the rejection of the latter. 

Spinoza's metaphysic is the best example of what may be called "logical monism"— the doctrine, 
namely, that the world as a whole is a single substance, none of whose parts are logically capable 
of existing alone. The ultimate basis for this view is the belief that every proposition has a single 
subject and a single predicate, which leads us to the conclusion that relations and plurality must be 
illusory. Spinoza thought that the nature of the world and of human life could be logi- 


- 577 - 



cally deduced from self-evident axioms; we ought to be as resigned to events as to the fact that 2 
and 2 are 4, since they are equally the outcome of logical necessity. The whole of this metaphysic 
is impossible to accept; it is incompatible with modern logic and with scientific method. Facts 
have to be discovered by observation, not by reasoning; when we successfully infer the future, we 
do so by means of principles which are not logically necessary, but are suggested by empirical 
data. And the concept of substance, upon which Spinoza relies, is one which neither science nor 
philosophy can nowadays accept. 

But when we come to Spinoza's ethics, we feel— or at least I feel-that something, though not 
everything, can be accepted even when the metaphysical foundation has been rejected. Broadly 
speaking, Spinoza is concerned to show how it is possible to live nobly even when we recognize 
the limits of human power. He himself, by his doctrine of necessity, makes these limits narrower 
than they are; but when they indubitably exist, Spinoza's maxims are probably the best possible. 
Take, for instance, death: nothing that a man can do will make him immortal, and it is therefore 
futile to spend time in fears and lamentations over the fact that we must die. To be obsessed by the 
fear of death is a kind of slavery; Spinoza is right in saying that "the free man thinks of nothing 
less than of death." But even in this case, it is only death in general that should be so treated; death 
of any particular disease should, if possible, be averted by submitting to medical care. What 
should, even in this case, be avoided, is a certain kind of anxiety or terror; the necessary measures 
should be taken calmly, and our thoughts should, as far as possible, be then directed to other 
matters. The same considerations apply to all other purely personal misfortunes. 

But how about misfortunes to people whom you love? Let us think of some of the things that are 
likely to happen in our time to inhabitants of Europe or China. Suppose you are a Jew, and your 
family has been massacred. Suppose you are an underground worker against the Nazis, and your 
wife has been shot because you could not be caught. Suppose your husband, for some purely 
imaginary crime, has been sent to forced labour in the Arctic, and has died of cruelty and 
starvation. Suppose your daughter has been raped and then killed by enemy 


- 578 - 



soldiers. Ought you, in these circumstances, to preserve a philosophic calm? 

If you follow Christ's teaching, you will say "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they 
do." I have known Quakers who could have said this sincerely and profoundly, and whom I 
admired because they could. But before giving admiration one must be very sure that the 
misfortune is felt as deeply as it should be. One cannot accept the attitude of some among the 
Stoics, who said, "What does it matter to me if my family suffer? I can still be virtuous." The 
Christian principle, "Love your enemies," is good, but the Stoic principle, "Be indifferent to your 
friends," is bad. And the Christian principle does not inculcate calm, but an ardent love even 
towards the worst of men. There is nothing to be said against it except that it is too difficult for 
most of us to practise sincerely. 

The primitive reaction to such disasters is revenge. When Macduff leams that his wife and 
children have been killed by Macbeth, he resolves to kill the tyrant himself. This reaction is still 
admired by most people, when the injury is great, and such as to arouse moral horror in 
disinterested people. Nor can it be wholly condemned, for it is one of the forces generating 
punishment, and punishment is sometimes necessary. Moreover, from the point of view of mental 
health, the impulse to revenge is likely to be so strong that, if it is allowed no outlet, a man’s 
whole outlook on life may become distorted and more or less insane. This is not true universally, 
but it is true in a large percentage of cases. But on the other side it must be said that revenge is a 
very dangerous motive. In so far as society admits it, it allows a man to be the judge in his own 
case, which is exactly what the law tries to prevent. Moreover it is usually an excessive motive; it 
seeks to inflict more punishment than is desirable. Torture, for example, should not be punished 
by torture, but the man maddened by lust for vengeance will think a painless death too good for 
the object of his hate. Moreover— and it is here that Spinoza is in the right— a life dominated by a 
single passion is a narrow life, incompatible with every kind of wisdom. Revenge as such is 
therefore not the best reaction to injury. 

Spinoza would say what the Christian says, and also something more. For him, all sin is due to 
ignorance; he would "forgive them, for they know not what they do." But he would have you 
avoid the limited purview from which, in his opinion, sin springs, and would 


- 579 - 



urge you, even under the greatest misfortunes, to avoid being shut up in the world of your sorrow; 
he would have you understand it by seeing it in relation to its causes and as a part of the whole 
order of nature. As we saw, he believes that hatred can be overcome by love: "Hatred is increased 
by being reciprocated, and can on the other hand be destroyed by love. Hatred which is completely 
vanquished by love, passes into love; and love is thereupon greater, than if hatred had not 
preceded it." I wish I could believe this, but I cannot, except in exceptional cases where the person 
hating is completely in the power of the person who refuses to hate in return. In such cases, 
surprise at being not punished may have a refonning effect. But so long as the wicked have power, 
it is not much use assuring them that you do not hate them, since they will attribute your words to 
the wrong motive. And you cannot deprive them of power by non-resistance. 

The problem for Spinoza is easier than it is for one who has no belief in the ultimate goodness of 
the universe. Spinoza thinks that, if you see your misfortunes as they are in reality, as part of the 
concatenation of causes stretching from the beginning of time to the end, you will see that they are 
only misfortunes to you, not to the universe, to which they are merely passing discords 
heightening an ultimate harmony. I cannot accept this; I think that particular events are what they 
are, and do not become different by absorption into a whole. Each act of cruelty is eternally a part 
of the universe; nothing that happens later can make that act good rather than bad, or can confer 
perfection on the whole of which it is a part. 

Nevertheless, when it is your lot to have to endure something that is (or seems to you) worse than 
the ordinary lot of mankind, Spinoza's principle of thinking about the whole, or at any rate about 
larger matters than your own grief, is a useful one. There are even times when it is comforting to 
reflect that human life, with all that it contains of evil and suffering, is an infinitesimal part of the 
life of the universe. Such reflections may not suffice to constitute a religion, but in a painful world 
they are a help towards sanity and an antidote to the paralysis of utter despair. 


- 580 - 



CHAPTER XI Leibniz 


LEIBNIZ ( 1646-1716) was one of the supreme intellects of all time, but as a human being he was 
not admirable. He had, it is true, the virtues that one would wish to find mentioned in a 
testimonial to a prospective employee: he was industrious, frugal, temperate, and financially 
honest. But he was wholly destitute of those higher philosophic virtues that are so notable in 
Spinoza. His best thought was not such as would win him popularity, and he left his records of it 
unpublished in his desk. What he published was designed to win the approbation of princes and 
princesses. The consequence is that there are two systems of philosophy which may be regarded as 
representing Leibniz: one, which he proclaimed, was optimistic, orthodox, fantastic, and shallow; 
the other, which has been slowly unearthed from his manuscripts by fairly recent editors, was 
profound, coherent, largely Spinozistic, and amazingly logical. It was the popular Leibniz who 
invented the doctrine that this is the best of all possible worlds (to which L. H. Bradley added the 
sardonic comment "and everything in it is a necessary evil"); it was this Leibniz whom Voltaire 
caricatured as Doctor Pangloss. It would be unhistorical to ignore this Leibniz, but the other is of 
far greater philosophical importance. 

Leibniz was bom two years before the end of the Thirty Years’ War, at Leipzig, where his father 
was professor of moral philosophy. At the university he studied law, and in 1666 he obtained a 
Doctor's degree at Altdorf, where he was offered a professorship, which he refused, saying he had 
"very different things in view." In 1667 he entered the service of the archbishop of Mainz, who, 
like other West Gennan princes, was oppressed by fear of Louis XIV. With the approval of the 
archbishop, Leibniz tried to persuade the Trench king to invade Egypt rather than Germany, but 
was met with a polite reminder that since the time of Saint Louis the holy war against the 

- 581 - 



infidel had gone out of fashion. His project remained unknown to the public until it was 
discovered by Napoleon when he occupied Hanover in 1803, four years after his own abortive 
Egyptian expedition. In 1672, in connection with this scheme, Leibniz went to Paris, where he 
spent the greater part of the next four years. His contacts in Paris were of great importance for his 
intellectual development, for Paris at that time led the world both in philosophy and in 
mathematics. It was there, in 1675-6, that he invented the infinitesimal calculus, in ignorance of 
Newton's previous but unpublished work on the same subject. Leibniz's work was first published 
in 1684, Newton's in 1687. The consequent dispute as to priority was unfortunate, and 
discreditable to all parties. 

Leibniz was somewhat mean about money. When any young lady at the court of Hanover married, 
he used to give her what he called a "wedding present," consisting of useful maxims, ending up 
with the advice not to give up washing now that she had secured a husband. History does not 
record whether the brides were grateful. 

In Gennany Leibniz had been taught a neo-scholastic Aristotelian philosophy, of which he 
retained something throughout his later life. But in Paris he came to know Cartesianism and the 
materialism of Gassendi, both of which influenced him; at this time, he said, he abandoned the 
"trivial schools," meaning scholasticism. In Paris he came to know Malebranche and Amauld the 
Jansenist. The last important influence on his philosophy was that of Spinoza, whom he visited in 
1676. He spent a month in frequent discussions with him, and secured part of the Ethics in 
manuscript. In later years he joined in decrying Spinoza, and minimized his contacts with him, 
saying he had met him once, and Spinoza had told some good anecdotes about politics. 

His connection with the House of Hanover, in whose service he remained for the rest of his life, 
began in 1673. Prom 1680 onwards he was their librarian at WolfcnbA'Attcl, and was officially 
employed in writing the history of Brunswick. He had reached the year 1005 when he died. The 
work was not published till 1843. Some of his time was spent on a project for the reunion of the 
Churches, but this proved abortive. He travelled to Italy to obtain evidence that the Dukes of 
Brunswick were connected with the Este family. But in spite of these services he was left behind 
at Hanover when George I became king of England, the chief reason being that his quarrel with 
Newton had 


- 582 - 



made England unfriendly to him. However, the Princess of Wales, as he told all his 
correspondents, sided with him against Newton. In spite of her favour, he died neglected. 

Leibniz's popular philosophy may be found in the Monadology and the Principles of Nature and 
of Grace, one of which (it is uncertain which) he wrote for Prince Eugene of Savoy, 

Marlborough's colleague. The basis of his theological optimism is set forth in the ThA©odicA©e, 
which he wrote for Queen Charlotte of Prussia. I shall begin with the philosophy expounded in 
these writings, and then proceed to his more solid work which he left unpublished. 

Like Descartes and Spinoza, Leibniz based his philosophy on the notion of substance, but he 
differed radically from them as regards the relation of mind and matter, and as regards the number 
of substances. Descartes allowed three substances, God and mind and matter; Spinoza admitted 
God alone. For Descartes, extension is the essence of matter; for Spinoza, both extension and 
thought are attributes of God. Leibniz held that extension cannot be an attribute of a substance. 

His reason was that extension involves plurality, and can therefore only belong to an aggregate of 
substances; each single substance must be unextended. He believed, consequently, in an infinite 
number of substances, which he called "monads." Each of these would have some of the 
properties of a physical point, but only when viewed abstractly; in fact, each monad is a soul. This 
follows naturally from the rejection of extension as an attribute of substance; the only remaining 
possible essential attribute seemed to be thought. Thus Leibniz was led to deny the reality of 
matter, and to substitute an infinite family of souls. 

The doctrine that substances cannot interact, which had been developed by Descartes's followers, 
was retained by Leibniz, and led to curious consequences. No two monads, he held, can ever have 
any causal relation to each other; when it seems as if they had, appearances are deceptive. 

Monads, as he expressed it, are "windowless." This led to two difficulties: one in dynamics, where 
bodies seem to affect each other, especially in impact; the other in relation to perception, which 
seems to be an effect of the perceived object upon the percipient. We will ignore the dynamical 
difficulty for the present, and consider only the question of perception. Leibniz held that every 
monad mirrors the universe, not because the universe affects it, but because God has given it a 
nature which spontaneously produces this result. There is a "pre- 


- 583 - 



etablished harmony" between the changes in one monad and those in another, which produces the 
semblance of interaction. This is obviously an extension of the two clocks, which strike at the 
same moment because each keeps perfect time. Leibniz has an infinite number of clocks, all 
arranged by the Creator to strike at the same instant, not because they affect each other, but 
because each is a perfectly accurate mechanism. To those who thought the pre-established 
hannony odd, Leibniz pointed out what admirable evidence it afforded of the existence of God. 

Monads form a hierarchy, in which some are superior to others in the clearness and distinctness 
with which they mirror the universe. In all there is some degree of confusion in perception, but the 
amount of confusion varies according to the dignity of the monad concerned. A human body is 
entirely composed of monads, each of which is a soul, and each of which is immortal, but there is 
one dominant monad which is what is called the soul of the man of whose body it forms part. This 
monad is dominant, not only in the sense of having clearer perceptions than the others, but also in 
another sense. The changes in a human body (in ordinary circumstances) happen for the sake of 
the dominant monad: when my arm moves, the purpose served by the movement is in the 
dominant monad, i.e., my mind, not in the monads that compose my arm. This is the truth of what 
appears to common sense as the control of my will over my arm. 

Space, as it appears to the senses, and as it is assumed in physics, is not real, but it has a real 
counterpart, namely the arrangement of the monads in a three-dimensional order according to the 
point of view from which they mirror the world. Each monad sees the world in a certain 
perspective peculiar to itself; in this sense we can speak, somewhat loosely, of the monad as 
having a spatial position. 

Allowing ourselves this way of speaking, we can say that there is no such thing as a vacuum; 
every possible point of view is filled by one actual monad, and by only one. No two monads are 
exactly alike; this is Leibniz's principle of the "identity of indiscemibles." 

In contrasting himself with Spinoza, Leibniz made much of the free will allowed in his system. He 
had a "principle of sufficient reason," according to which nothing happens without a reason; but 
when we are concerned with free agents, the reasons for their actions "incline without 
necessitating." What a human being does always has a motive, 


- 584 - 



but the sufficient reason of his action has no logical necessity. So, at least, Leibniz says when he is 
writing popularly, but, as we shall see, he had another doctrine which he kept to himself after 
finding that Amauld thought it shocking. 

God's actions have the same kind of freedom. He always acts for the best, but He is not under any 
logical compulsion to do so. Leibniz agrees with Thomas Aquinas that God cannot act contrary to 
the laws of logic, but He can decree whatever is logically possible, and this leaves Him a great 
latitude of choice. 

Leibniz brought into their final form the metaphysical proofs of God's existence. These had a long 
history; they begin with Aristotle, or even with Plato; they were formalized by the scholastics, and 
one of them, the ontological argument, was invented by Saint Anselm. This argument, though 
rejected by Saint Thomas, was revived by Descartes. Leibniz, whose logical skill was supreme, 
stated the arguments better than they had ever been stated before. That is my reason for examining 
them in connection with him. 

Before examining the arguments in detail, it is as well to realize that modern theologians no 
longer rely upon them. Medieval theology is derivative from the Greek intellect. The God of the 
Old Testament is a God of power, the God of the New Testament is also a God of love; but the 
God of the theologians, from Aristotle to Calvin, is one whose appeal is intellectual: His existence 
solves certain puzzles which otherwise would create argumentative difficulties in the 
understanding of the universe. This Deity who appears at the end of a piece of reasoning, like the 
proof of a proposition in geometry, did not satisfy Rousseau, who reverted to a conception of God 
more akin to that of the Gospels. In the main, modern theologians, especially such as are 
Protestant, have followed Rousseau in this respect. The philosophers have been more 
conservative; in Hegel, Lotze, and Bradley arguments of the metaphysical sort persist, in spite of 
the fact that Kant professed to have demolished such arguments once for all. 

Leibniz's arguments for the existence of God are four in number; they are (1) the ontological 
argument, (2) the cosmological argument, (3) the argument from the eternal truths, (4) the 
argument from the pre-established hannony, which may be generalized into the argument from 
design, or the physico-theological argument, as Kant calls it. We will consider these arguments 
successively. 


- 585 - 



The ontological argument depends upon the distinction between existence and essence. Any 
ordinary person or thing, it is held, on the one hand exists, and on the other hand has certain 
qualities, which make up his or its "essence." Hamlet, though he does not exist, has a certain 
essence: he is melancholy, undecided, witty, etc. When we describe a person, the question whether 
he is real or imaginary remains open, however minute our description may be. This is expressed in 
scholastic language by saying that, in the case of any finite substance, its essence does not imply 
its existence. But in the case of God, defined as the most perfect Being, Saint Anselm, followed 
by Descartes, maintains that essence does imply existence, on the ground that a Being who 
possesses all other perfections is better if He exists than if He does not, from which it follows that 
if He does not He is not the best possible Being. 

Leibniz neither wholly accepts nor wholly rejects this argument; it needs to be supplemented, so 
he says, by a proof that God, so defined, is possible. He wrote out a proof that the idea of God is 
possible, which he showed to Spinoza when he saw him at the Hague. This proof defines God as 
the most perfect Being, i.e., as the subject of all perfections, and a perfection is defined as a 
"simple quality which is positive and absolute, and expresses without any limits whatever it does 
express." Leibniz easily proves that no two perfections, as above defined, can be incompatible. He 
concludes: "There is, therefore, or there can be conceived, a subject of all perfections, or most 
perfect Being. Whence it follows also that He exists, for existence is among the number of the 
perfections." 

Kant countered this argument by maintaining that "existence" is not a predicate. Another kind of 
refutation results from my theory of descriptions. The argument does not, to a modern mind, seem 
very convincing, but it is easier to feel convinced that it must be fallacious than it is to find out 
precisely where the fallacy lies. 

The cosmological argument is more plausible than the ontological argument. It is a fonn of the 
First-Cause argument, which is itself derived from Aristotle's argument of the unmoved mover. 
The FirstCause argument is simple. It points out that everything finite has a cause, which in turn 
had a cause, and so on. This series of previous causes cannot, it is maintained, be infinite, and the 
first tenn in the series must itself be uncaused, since otherwise it would not be the first 


- 586 - 



term. There is therefore an uncaused cause of everything, and this is obviously God. 

In Leibniz the argument takes a somewhat different form. He argues that every particular thing in 
the world is "contingent," that is to say, it would be logically possible for it not to exist; and this is 
true, not only of each particular thing, but of the whole universe. Even if we suppose the universe 
to have always existed, there is nothing within the universe to show why it exists. But everything 
has to have a sufficient reason, according to Leibniz's philosophy; therefore the universe as a 
whole must have a sufficient reason, which must be outside the universe. This sufficient reason is 
God. 

This argument is better than the straightforward First-Cause argument, and cannot be so easily 
refuted. The First-Cause argument rests on the assumption that every series must have a first tenn, 
which is false; for example, the series of proper fractions has no first term. But Leibniz's argument 
does not depend upon the view that the universe must have had a beginning in time. The argument 
is valid so long as we grant Leibniz's principle of sufficient reason, but if this principle is denied it 
collapses. What exactly Leibniz meant by the principle of sufficient reason is a controversial 
question. Couturat maintains that it means that every true proposition is "analytic," i.e., such that 
its contradictory is self-contradictory. But this interpretation (which has support in writings that 
Leibniz did not publish) belongs, if true, to the esoteric doctrine. In his published works he 
maintains that there is a difference between necessary and contingent propositions, that only the 
former follow from the laws of logic, and that all propositions asserting existence are contingent, 
with the sole exception of the existence of God. Though God exists necessarily, He was not 
compelled by logic to create the world; on the contrary, this was a free choice, motivated, but not 
necessitated, by His goodness. 

It is clear that Kant is right in saying that this argument depends upon the ontological argument. If 
the existence of the world can only be accounted for by the existence of a necessary Being, then 
there must be a Being whose essence involves existence, for that is what is meant by a necessary 
Being. But if it is possible that there should be a Being whose essence involves existence, then 
reason alone, without experience, can define such a Being, whose existence will follow from the 
ontological argument; for everything that has to do only with 


- 587 - 



essence can be known independently of experience— such at least is Leibniz's view. The apparent 
greater plausibility of the cosmological as opposed to the ontological argument is therefore 
deceptive. 

The argument from the eternal truths is a little difficult to state precisely. Perhaps we shall do well 
to state it first in rough outline, and only then proceed to the complete picture. Roughly, the 
argument is this: Such a statement as "it is raining" is sometimes true and sometimes false, but 
"two and two are four" is always true. All statements that have only to do with essence, not with 
existence, are either always true or never true. Those that are always true are called "eternal 
truths." The gist of the argument is that truths are part of the contents of minds, and that an eternal 
truth must be part of the content of an eternal mind. There is already an argument not unlike this 
in Plato, where he deduces immortality from the eternity of the ideas. But in Leibniz the argument 
is more developed. He holds that the ultimate reason for contingent truths must be found in 
necessary truths. The argument here is as in the cosmological argument: there must be a reason for 
the whole contingent world, and this reason cannot itself be contingent, but must be sought among 
eternal truths. But a reason for what exists must itself exist; therefore eternal truths must, in some 
sense, exist, and they can only exist as thoughts in the mind of God. This argument is really only 
another form of the cosmological argument. It is, however, open to the further objection that a 
truth can hardly be said to "exist" in a mind which apprehends it. 

The argument from the pre-established harmony, as Leibniz states it, is only valid for those who 
accept his windowless monads which all mirror the universe. The argument is that, since all the 
clocks keep time with each other without any causal interaction, there must have been a single 
outside Cause that regulated all of them. The difficulty, of course, is the one that besets the whole 
monadology: if the monads never interact, how does any one of them know that there are any 
others? What seems like mirroring the universe may be merely a dream. In fact, if Leibniz is right, 
it is merely a dream, but he has ascertained somehow that all the monads have similar dreams at 
the same time. This, of course, is fantastic, and would never have seemed credible but for the 
previous history of Cartesianism. 

Leibniz's argument, however, can be freed from dependence on his peculiar metaphysic, and 
transformed into what is called the argu- 


- 588 - 



ment from design. This argument contends that, on a survey of the known world, we find things 
which cannot plausibly be explained as the product of blind natural forces, but are much more 
reasonably to be regarded as evidences of a beneficent purpose. 

This argument has no fonnal logical defect; its premisses are empirical, and its conclusion 
professes to be reached in accordance with the usual canons of empirical inference. The question 
whether it is to be accepted or not turns, therefore, not on general metaphysical questions, but on 
comparatively detailed considerations. There is one important difference between this argument 
and the others, namely, that the God whom (if valid) it demonstrates need not have all the usual 
metaphysical attributes. He need not be omnipotent or omniscient; He may be only vastly wiser 
and more powerful than we are. The evils in the world may be due to His limited power. Some 
modem theologians have made use of these possibilities in forming their conception of God. But 
such speculations are remote from the philosophy of Leibniz, to which we must now return. 

One of the most characteristic features of that philosophy is the doctrine of many possible worlds. 
A world is "possible" if it does not contradict the laws of logic. There are an infinite number of 
possible worlds, all of which God contemplated before creating the actual world. Being good, God 
decided to create the best of the possible worlds, and He considered that one to be the best which 
had the greatest excess of good over evil. He could have created a world containing no evil, but it 
would not have been so good as the actual world. That is because some great goods are logically 
bound up with certain evils. To take a trivial illustration, a drink of cold water when you are very 
thirsty on a hot day may give you such great pleasure that you think the previous thirst, though 
painful, was worth enduring, because without it the subsequent enjoyment could not have been so 
great. For theology, it is not such illustrations that are important, but the connection of sin with 
free will. Free will is a great good, but it was logically impossible for God to bestow free will and 
at the same time decree that there should be no sin. God therefore decided to make man free, 
although he foresaw that Adam would eat the apple, and although sin inevitably brought 
punishment. The world that resulted, although it contains evil, has a greater surplus of good over 
evil than any other possible world; it is therefore the best of all 


- 589 - 



possible worlds, and the evil that it contains affords no argument against the goodness of God. 

This argument apparently satisfied the queen of Prussia. Her serfs continued to suffer the evil, 
while she continued to enjoy the good, and it was comforting to be assured by a great philosopher 
that this was just and right. 

Leibniz's solution of the problem of evil, like most of his other popular doctrines, is logically 
possible, but not very convincing. A ManichAjan might retort that this is the worst of all possible 
worlds, in which the good things that exist serve only to heighten the evils. The world, he might 
say, was created by a wicked demiurge, who allowed free will, which is good, in order to make 
sure of sin, which is bad, and of which the evil outweighs the good of free will. The demiurge, he 
might continue, created some virtuous men, in order that they might be punished by the wicked; 
for the punishment of the virtuous is so great an evil that it makes the world worse than if no good 
men existed. I am not advocating this opinion, which I consider fantastic; I am only saying that it 
is no more fantastic than Leibniz's theory. People wish to think the universe good, and will be 
lenient to bad arguments proving that it is so, while bad arguments proving that it is bad are 
closely scanned. In fact, of course, the world is partly good and partly bad, and no "problem of 
evil" arises unless this obvious fact is denied. 

I come now to Leibniz's esoteric philosophy, in which we find reasons for much that seems 
arbitrary or fantastic in his popular expositions, as well as an interpretation of his doctrines which, 
if it had become generally known, would have made them much less acceptable. It is a remarkable 
fact that he so imposed upon subsequent students of philosophy that most of the editors who 
published selections from the immense mass of his manuscripts preferred what supported the 
received interpretation of his system, and rejected as unimportant essays which prove him to have 
been a far more profound thinker than he wished to be thought. Most of the texts upon which we 
must rely for an understanding of his esoteric doctrine were first published in 1901 or 1903, in 
two works by Louis Couturat. One of these was even headed by Leibniz with the remark: "Here I 
have made enormous progress." But in spite of this, no editor thought it worth printing until 
Leibniz had been dead for nearly two centuries. It is true that 


- 590 - 



his letters to Amauld, which contain a part of his more profound philosophy, were published in 
the nineteenth century; but I was the first to notice their importance. Amauld's reception of these 
letters was discouraging. He writes: "I find in these thoughts so many things which alarm me, and 
which almost all men, if I am not mistaken, will find so shocking, that I do not see of what use a 
writing can be, which apparently all the world will reject." This hostile opinion no doubt led 
Leibniz, thenceforth, to adopt a policy of secrecy as to his real thoughts on philosophical subjects. 

The conception of substance, which is fundamental in the philosophies of Descartes, Spinoza, and 
Leibniz, is derived from the logical category of subject and predicate. Some words can be either 
subjects or predicates; e.g., I can say "the sky is blue" and "blue is a colour." Other words— of 
which proper names are the most obvious instances —can never occur as predicates, but only as 
subjects, or as one of the terms of a relation. Such words are held to designate substances. 
Substances, in addition to this logical characteristic, persist through time, unless destroyed by 
God's omnipotence (which, one gathers, never happens). Every true proposition is either general, 
like "all men are mortal," in which case it states that one predicate implies another, or particular, 
like "Socrates is mortal," in which case the predicate is contained in the subject, and the quality 
denoted by the predicate is part of the notion of the substance denoted by the subject. Whatever 
happens to Socrates can be asserted in a sentence in which "Socrates" is the subject and the words 
describing the happening in question are the predicate. All these predicates put together make up 
the "notion" of Socrates. All belong to him necessarily, in this sense, that a substance of which 
they could not be truly asserted would not be Socrates, but some one else. 

Leibniz was a firm believer in the importance of logic, not only in its own sphere, but as the basis 
of metaphysics. He did work on mathematical logic which would have been enonnously important 
if he had published it; he would, in that case, have been the founder of mathematical logic, which 
would have become known a century and a half sooner than it did in fact. He abstained from 
publishing, because he kept on finding evidence that Aristotle’s doctrine of the syllogism was 
wrong on some points; respect for Aristotle made it impossible for him to believe this, so he 
mistakenly supposed that the errors must 


- 591 - 



be his own. Nevertheless he cherished through his life the hope of discovering a kind of 
generalized mathematics, which he called Characteristica Universalis, by means of which 
thinking could be replaced by calculation. "If we had it," he says, "we should be able to reason in 
metaphysics and morals in much the same way as in geometry and analysis." "If controversies 
were to arise, there would be no more need of disputation between two philosophers than between 
two accountants. For it would suffice to take their pencils in their hands, to sit down to their 
slates, and to say to each other (with a friend as witness, if they liked): Let us calculate." 

Leibniz based his philosophy upon two logical premisses, the law of contradiction and the law of 
sufficient reason. Both depend upon the notion of an "analytic" proposition, which is one in which 
the predicate is contained in the subject— for instance, "all white men are men." The law of 
contradiction states that all analytic propositions are true. The law of sufficient reason (in the 
esoteric system only) states that all true propositions are analytic. This applies even to what we 
should regard as empirical statements about matters of fact. If I make a journey, the notion of me 
must from all eternity have included the notion of this journey, which is a predicate of me. "We 
may say that the nature of an individual substance, or complete being, is to have a notion so 
completed that it suffices to comprehend, and to render deducible from it, all the predicates of the 
subject to which this notion is attributed. Thus the quality of king, which belongs to Alexander the 
Great, abstracting from the subject, is not sufficiently determined for an individual, and does not 
involve other qualities of the same subject, nor all that the notion of this prince contains, whereas 
God, seeing the individual notion or hecceity of Alexander, sees in it at the same time the 
foundation and the reason of all the predicates which can be truly attributed to him, as e.g. 
whether he would conquer Darius and Porus, even to knowing a priori (and not by experience) 
whether he died a natural death or by poison, which we can only know by history." 

One of the most definite statements of the basis of his metaphysic occurs in a letter to Amauld: 

"In consulting the notion which I have of every true proposition, I find that every predicate, 
necessary or contingent, past, present, or future, is comprised in the notion of the subject, and I 
ask no more. 


- 592 - 



. . . The proposition in question is of great importance, and deserves to be well established, for it 
follows that every soul is as a world apart, independent of everything else except God; that it is 
not only immortal and so to speak impassible, but that it keeps in its substance traces of all that 
happens to it." 

He goes on to explain that substances do not act on each other, but agree through all mirroring the 
universe, each from its own point of view. There can be no interaction, because all that happens to 
each substance is part of its own notion, and eternally determined if that substance exists. 

This system is evidently just as deterministic as that of Spinoza. Amauld expresses his horror of 
the statement (which Leibniz had made): "That the individual notion of each person involves once 
for all everything that will ever happen to him." Such a view is evidently incompatible with the 
Christian doctrine of sin and free will. Finding it ill received by Arnauld, Leibniz carefully 
refrained from, making it public. 

For human beings, it is true, there is a difference between truths known by logic and truths known 
by experience. This difference arises in two ways. In the first place, although everything that 
happens to Adam follows from his notion, if he exists, we can only ascertain his existence by 
experience. In the second place, the notion of any individual substance is infinitely complex, and 
the analysis required to deduce his predicates is only possible for God. These differences, 
however, are only due to our ignorance and intellectual limitation; for God, they do not exist. God 
apprehends the notion of Adam in all its infinite complexity, and can therefore see all true 
propositions about Adam as analytic. God can also ascertain a priori whether Adam exists. For 
God knows his own goodness, from which it follows that he will create the best possible world; 
and he also knows whether or not Adam forms part of this world. There is there, fore no real 
escape from determinism through our ignorance. 

There is, however, a further point, which is very curious. At most times, Leibniz represents the 
Creation as a free act of God, requiring the exercise of His will. According to this doctrine, the 
detennination of what actually exists is not effected by observation, but must proceed by way of 
God's goodness. Apart from God’s goodness, which 


- 593 - 



leads Him to create the best possible world, there is no a priori reason why one thing should exist 
rather than another. 

But sometimes, in papers not shown to any human being, there is a quite different theory as to 
why some things exist and others, equally possible, do not. According to this view, everything that 
does not exist struggles to exist, but not all possibles can exist, because they are not all 
"compossible." It may be possible that A should exist, and also possible that B should exist, but 
not possible that both A and B should exist; in that case, A and B are not "compossible." Two or 
more things are only "compossible" when it is possible for all of them to exist. Leibniz seems to 
have imagined a sort of war in the Limbo inhabited by essences all trying to exist; in this war, 
groups of compossibles combine, and the largest group of compossibles wins, like the largest 
pressure group in a political contest. Leibniz even uses this conception as a way of defining 
existence. He says: "The existent may be defined as that which is compatible with more things 
than is anything incompatible with itself." That is to say, if A is incompatible with B, while A is 
compatible with C and D and E, but B is only compatible with F and G, then A, but not B, exists 
by definition. "The existent," he says, "is the being which is compatible with the most things." 

In this account, there is no mention of God, and apparently no act of creation. Nor is there need of 
anything but pure logic for determining what exists. The question whether A and B are 
compossible is, for Leibniz, a logical question, namely: Does the existence of both A and B 
involve a contradiction? It follows that, in theory, logic can decide the question what group of 
compossibles is the largest, and this group consequently will exist. 

Perhaps, however, Leibniz did not really mean that the above was a definition of existence. If it 
was merely a criterion, it can be reconciled with his popular views by means of what he calls 
"metaphysical perfection." Metaphysical perfection, as he uses the term, seems to mean quantity 
of existence. It is, he says, "nothing but the magnitude of positive reality strictly understood." He 
always argues that God created as much as possible; this is one of his reasons for rejecting a 
vacuum. There is a general belief (which I have never understood) that it is better to exist than not 
to exist; on this ground children are exhorted to be grateful to their parents. Leibniz evidently held 
this 


- 594 - 



view, and thought it part of God's goodness to create as full a universe as possible. It would follow 
that the actual world would consist of the largest group of compossibles. It would still be true that 
logic alone, given a sufficiently able logician, could decide whether a given possible substance 
would exist or not. 

Leibniz, in his private thinking, is the best example of a philosopher who uses logic as a key to 
metaphysics. This type of philosophy begins with Parmenides, and is carried further in Plato's use 
of the theory of ideas to prove various extra-logical propositions. Spinoza belongs to the same 
type, and so does Hegel. But none of these is so clear cut as Leibniz in drawing inferences from 
syntax to the real world. This kind of argumentation has fallen into disrepute owing to the growth 
of empiricism. Whether any valid inferences are possible from language to non-linguistic facts is a 
question as to which I do not care to dogmatize; but certainly the inferences found in Leibniz and 
other a priori philosophers are not valid, since all are due to a defective logic. The subject- 
predicate logic, which all such philosophers in the past assumed, either ignores relations 
altogether, or produces fallacious arguments to prove that relations are unreal. Leibniz is guilty of 
a special inconsistency in combining the subject-predicate logic with pluralism, for the 
proposition "there are many monads" is not of the subject-predicate form. To be consistent, a 
philosopher who believes all propositions to be of this fonn should be a monist, like Spinoza. 
Leibniz rejected monism largely owing to his interest in dynamics, and to his argument that 
extension involves repetition, and therefore cannot be an attribute of a single substance. 

Leibniz is a dull writer, and his effect on Gennan philosophy was to make it pedantic and arid. His 
disciple Wolf, who dominated the German universities until the publication of Kant Critique of 
Pure Reason, left out whatever was most interesting in Leibniz, and produced a dry professorial 
way of thinking. Outside Germany, Leibniz's philosophy had little influence; his contemporary 
Locke governed British philosophy, while in France Descartes continued to reign until he was 
overthrown by Voltaire, who made English empiricism fashionable. 

Nevertheless, Leibniz remains a great man, and his greatness is more apparent now than it was at 
any earlier time. Apart from his eminence as a mathematician and as the inventor of the 
infinitesimal calculus, 


- 595 - 



he was a pioneer in mathematical logic, of which he perceived the importance when no one else 
did so. And his philosophical hypotheses, though fantastic, are very clear, and capable of precise 
expression. Even his monads can still be useful as suggesting possible ways of viewing 
perception, though they cannot be regarded as windowless. What I, for my part, think best in his 
theory of monads is his two kinds of space, one subjective, in the perceptions of each monad, and 
one objective, consisting of the assemblage of points of view of the various monads. This, I 
believe, is still useful in relating perception to physics. 

CHAPTER XII Philosophical Liberalism 

THE rise of liberalism, in politics and philosophy, provides material for the study of a very 
general and very important question, namely: What has been the influence of political and social 
circumstances upon the thoughts of eminent and original thinkers, and, conversely, what has been 
the influence of these men upon subsequent political and social developments? 

Two opposite errors, both common, are to be guarded against. On the one hand, men who are 
more familiar with books than with affairs are apt to over-estimate the influence of philosophers. 
When they see some political party proclaiming itself inspired by So-and-So's teaching, they think 
its actions are attributable to So-and-So, whereas, not infrequently, the philosopher is only 
acclaimed because he recommends what the party would have done in any case. Writers of books, 
until recently, almost all exaggerated the effects of their predecessors in the same trade. But 
conversely, a new error has arisen by reaction against the old one, and this new error consists in 
regarding theorists as almost passive products of their circumstances, and as having hardly any 
influence at all upon the course of events. Ideas, according to this view, are the froth on the 
surface of deep currents, which are determined by material and technical causes: social changes 
are no more 


- 596 - 



caused by thought than the flow of a river is caused by the bubbles that reveal its direction to an 
onlooker. For my part, I believe that the truth lies between these two extremes. Between ideas and 
practical life, as everywhere else, there is reciprocal interaction; to ask which is cause and which 
effect is as futile as the problem of the hen and the egg. I shall not waste time upon a discussion of 
this question in the abstract, but shall consider historically one important case of the general 
question, namely the development of liberalism and its offshoots from the end of the seventeenth 
century to the present day. 

Early liberalism was a product of England and Holland, and had certain well-marked 
characteristics. It stood for religious toleration; it was Protestant, but of a latitudinarian rather than 
of a fanatical kind; it regarded the wars of religion as silly. It valued commerce and industry, and 
favoured the rising middle class rather than the monarchy and the aristocracy; it had immense 
respect for the rights of property, especially when accumulated by the labours of the individual 
possessor. The hereditary principle, though not rejected, was restricted in scope more than it had 
previously been; in particular, the divine right of kings was rejected in favour of the view that 
every community has a right, at any rate initially, to choose its own form of government. 

Implicitly, the tendency of early liberalism was towards democracy tempered by the rights of 
property. There was a belief— not at first wholly explicit— that all men are bom equal, and that their 
subsequent inequality is a product of circumstances. This led to a great emphasis upon the 
importance of education as opposed to congenital characteristics. There was a certain bias against 
government, because governments almost everywhere were in the hands of kings or aristocracies, 
who seldom either understood or respected the needs of merchants, but this bias was held in check 
by the hope that the necessary understanding and respect would be won before long. 

Early liberalism was optimistic, energetic, and philosophic, because it represented growing forces 
which appeared likely to become victorious without great difficulty, and to bring by their victory 
great benefits to mankind. It was opposed to everything medieval, both in philosophy and in 
politics, because medieval theories had been used to sanction the powers of Church and king, to 
justify persecution, and to obstruct the rise of science; but it was opposed equally to the then 
modem fanaticisms of Calvinists and Anabaptists. It wanted an 


- 597 - 



end to political and theological strife, in order to liberate energies for the exciting enterprises of 
commerce and science, such as the East India Company and the Bank of England, the theory of 
gravitation and the discovery of the circulation of the blood. Throughout the Western world 
bigotry was giving place to enlightenment, the fear of Spanish power was ending, all classes were 
increasing in prosperity, and the highest hopes appeared to be warranted by the most sober 
judgement. For a hundred years, nothing occurred to dim these hopes; then, at last, they 
themselves generated the French Revolution, which led directly to Napoleon and thence to the 
Holy Alliance. After these events, liberalism had to acquire its second wind before the renewed 
optimism of the nineteenth century became possible. 

Before embarking upon any detail, it will be well to consider the general pattern of the liberal 
movements from the seventeenth to the nineteenth century. This pattern is at first simple, but 
grows gradually more and more complex. The distinctive character of the whole movement is, in a 
certain wide sense, individualism; but this is a vague term until further defined. The philosophers 
of Greece, down to and including Aristotle, were not individualists in the sense in which I wish to 
use the term. They thought of a man as essentially a member of a community; Plato Republic, for 
example, is concerned to define the good community, not the good individual. With the loss of 
political liberty from the time of Alexander onwards, individualism developed, and was 
represented by the Cynics and Stoics. According to the Stoic philosophy, a man could live a good 
life in no matter what social circumstances. This was also the view of Christianity, especially 
before it acquired control of the State. But in the Middle Ages, while mystics kept alive the 
original individualistic trends in Christian ethics, the outlook of most men, including the majority 
of philosophers, was dominated by a firm synthesis of dogma, law, and custom, which caused 
men's theoretical beliefs and practical morality to be controlled by a social institution, namely the 
Catholic Church: what was true and what was good was to be ascertained, not by solitary thought, 
but by the collective wisdom of Councils. 

The first important breach in this system was made by Protestantism, which asserted that General 
Councils may err. To determine the truth thus became no longer a social but an individual 
enterprise. 


- 598 - 



Since different individuals reached different conclusions, the result was strife, and theological 
decisions were sought, no longer in assemblies of bishops, but on the battle-field. Since neither 
party was able to extirpate the other, it became evident, in the end, that a method must be found of 
reconciling intellectual and ethical individualism with ordered social life. This was one of the 
main problems which early liberalism attempted to solve. 

Meanwhile individualism had penetrated into philosophy. Descartes's fundamental certainty, "I 
think, therefore I am," made the basis of knowledge different for each person, since for each the 
starting-point was his own existence, not that of other individuals or of the community. His 
emphasis upon the reliability of clear and distinct ideas tended in the same direction, since it is by 
introspection that we think we discover whether our ideas are clear and distinct. Most philosophy 
since Descartes has had this intellectually individualistic aspect in a greater or less degree. 

There are, however, various forms of this general position, which have, in practice, very different 
consequences. The outlook of the typical scientific discoverer has perhaps the smallest dose of 
individualism. When he arrives at a new theory, he does so solely because it seems right to him; 
he does not bow to authority, for, if he did, he would continue to accept the theories of his 
predecessors. At the same time, his appeal is to generally received canons of truth, and he hopes to 
persuade other men, not by his authority, but by arguments which are convincing to them as 
individuals. In science, any clash between the individual and society is in essence transitory, since 
men of science, broadly speaking, all accept the same intellectual standards, and therefore debate 
and investigation usually produce agreement in the end. This, however, is a modem development; 
in the time of Galileo, the authority of Aristotle and the Church was still considered at least as 
cogent as the evidence of the senses. This shows how the element of individualism in scientific 
method, though not prominent, is nevertheless essential. 

Early liberalism was individualistic in intellectual matters, and also in economics, but was not 
emotionally or ethically self-assertive. This form of liberalism dominated the English eighteenth 
century, the founders of the American Constitution, and the French encyclopAjdists. During the 
French Revolution, it was represented by the more 


- 599 - 



moderate parties, including the Girondins, but with their extennination it disappeared for a 
generation from French politics. In England, after the Napoleonic wars, it again became influential 
with the rise of the Benthamites and the Manchester School. Its greatest success has been in 
America, where, unhampered by feudalism and a State Church, it has been dominant from 1776 to 
the present day, or at any rate to 1933. 

A new movement, which has gradually developed into the antithesis of liberalism, begins with 
Rousseau, and acquires strength from the romantic movement and the principle of nationality. In 
this movement, individualism is extended from the intellectual sphere to that of the passions, and 
the anarchic aspects of individualism are made explicit. The cult of the hero, as developed by 
Carlyle and Nietzsche, is typical of this philosophy. Various elements were combined in it. There 
was dislike of early industrialism, hatred of the ugliness that it produced, and revulsion against its 
cruelties. There was a nostalgia for the Middle Ages, which were idealized owing to hatred of the 
modem world. There was an attempt to combine championship of the fading privileges of Church 
and aristocracy with fence of wageearners against the tyranny of manufacturers. There was 
vehement assertion of the right of rebellion in the name of nationalism, and of the splendour of 
war in fence of "liberty." Byron was the poet of this movement; Fichte, Carlyle, and Nietzsche 
were its philosophers. 

But since we cannot all have the career of heroic leaders, and cannot all make our individual will 
prevail, this philosophy, like all other fonns of anarchism, inevitably leads, when adopted, to the 
despotic government of the most successful "hero." And when his tyranny is established, he will 
suppress in others the self-assertive ethic by which he has risen to power. This whole theory of 
life, therefore, is selfrefuting, in the sense that its adoption in practice leads to the realization of 
something utterly different: a dictatorial State in which the individual is severely repressed. 

There is yet another philosophy which, in the main, is an offshoot of liberalism, namely that of 
Marx. I shall consider him at a later stage, but for the moment he is merely to be borne in mind. 

The first comprehensive statement of the liberal philosophy is to be found in Locke, the most 
influential though by no means the most profound of modem philosophers. In England, his views 
were so 


- 600 - 



completely in harmony with those of most intelligent men that it is difficult to trace their influence 
except in theoretical philosophy; in France, on the other hand, where they led to an opposition to 
the existing regime in practice and to the prevailing Cartesianism in theory, they clearly had a 
considerable effect in shaping the course of events. This is an example of a general principle: a 
philosophy developed in a politically and economically advanced country, which is, in its 
birthplace, little more than a clarification and systematization of prevalent opinion, may become 
elsewhere a source of revolutionary ardour, and ultimately of actual revolution. It is mainly 
through theorists that the maxims regulating the policy of advanced countries become known to 
less advanced countries. In the advanced countries, practice inspires theory; in the others, theory 
inspires practice. This difference is one of the reasons why transplanted ideas are seldom so 
successful as they were in their native soil. 

Before considering the philosophy of Locke, let us review some of the circumstances in 
seventeenth-century England that were influential in forming his opinions. 

The conflict between king and Parliament in the Civil War gave Englishmen, once for all, a love 
of compromise and moderation, and a fear of pushing any theory to its logical conclusion, which 
has dominated them down to the present time. The principles for which the Long Parliament 
contended had, at first, the support of a large majority. They wished to abolish the king's right to 
grant trade monopolies, and to make him acknowledge the exclusive right of Parliament to impose 
taxes. They desired liberty within the Church of England for opinions and practices which were 
persecuted by Archbishop Laud. They held that Parliament should meet at stated intervals, and 
should not be convoked only on rare occasions when the king found its collaboration 
indispensable. They objected to arbitrary arrest and to the subservience of the judges to the royal 
wishes. But many, while prepared to agitate for these ends, were not prepared to levy war against 
the king, which appeared to them an act of treason and impiety. As soon as actual war broke out, 
the division of forces became more nearly equal. 

The political development from the outbreak of the Civil War to the establishment of Cromwell as 
Lord Protector followed the course which has now become familiar but was then unprecedented. 
The 


- 601 - 



Parliamentary party consisted of two factions, the Presbyterians and the Independents; the 
Presbyterians desired to preserve a State Church, but to abolish bishops; the Independents agreed 
with them about bishops, but held that each congregation should be free to choose its own 
theology, without the interference of any central ecclesiastical government. The Presbyterians, in 
the main, were of a higher social class than the Independents, and their political opinions were 
more moderate. They wished to come to terms with the king as soon as defeat had made him 
conciliatory. Their policy, however, was rendered impossible by two circumstances: first, the king 
developed a martyr's stubbornness about bishops; second, the defeat of the king proved difficult, 
and was only achieved by Cromwell's New Model Anny, which consisted of Independents. 
Consequently, when the king's military resistance was broken, he could still not be induced to 
make a treaty, and the Presbyterians had lost the preponderance of anned force in the 
Parliamentary annies. The defence of democracy had thrown power into the hands of a minority, 
and it used its power with a complete disregard for democracy and parliamentary government. 
When Charles I had attempted to arrest the five members, there had been a universal outcry, and 
his failure had made him ridiculous. But Cromwell had no such difficulties. By Pride's Purge, he 
dismissed about a hundred Presbyterian members, and obtained for a time a subservient majority. 
When, finally, he decided to dismiss Parliament altogether, "not a dog barked"— war had made 
only military force seem important, and had produced a contempt for constitutional forms. For the 
rest of Cromwell's life, the government of England was a military tyranny, hated by an increasing 
majority of the nation, but impossible to shake off while his partisans alone were armed. 

Charles II, after hiding in oak trees and living as a refugee in Holland, determined, at the 
Restoration, that he would not again set out on his travels. This imposed a certain moderation. He 
claimed no power to impose taxes not sanctioned by Parliament. He assented to the Habeas 
Corpus Act, which deprived the Crown of the power of arbitrary arrest. On occasion he could 
flout the fiscal power of Parliament by means of subsidies from Louis XIV, but in the main he 
was a constitutional monarch. Most of the limitations of royal power originally desired by the 
opponents of Charles I were conceded 


- 602 - 



at the Restoration, and were respected by Charles II because it had been shown that kings could be 
made to suffer at the hands of their subjects. 

James II, unlike his brother, was totally destitute of subtlety and finesse. By his bigoted 
Catholicism he united against himself the Anglicans and Nonconformists, in spite of his attempts 
to conciliate the latter by granting them toleration in defiance of Parliament. Foreign policy also 
played a part. The Stuarts, in order to avoid the taxation required in war-time, which would have 
made them dependent upon Parliament, pursued a policy of subservience, first to Spain and then 
to France. The growing power of France roused the invariable English hostility to the leading 
Continental State, and the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes made Protestant feeling bitterly 
opposed to Louis XIV. In the end, almost everybody in England wished to be rid of James. But 
almost everybody was equally detennined to avoid a return to the days of the Civil War and 
Cromwell's dictatorship. Since there was no constitutional way of getting rid of James, there must 
be a revolution, but it must be quickly ended, so as to give no opportunity for disruptive forces. 
The rights of Parliament must be secured once for all. The king must go, but monarchy must be 
preserved; it should be, however, not a monarchy of Divine Right, but one dependent upon 
legislative sanction, and so upon Parliament. By a combination of aristocracy and big business, all 
this was achieved in a moment, without the necessity of firing a shot. Compromise and 
moderation had succeeded, after every form of intransigeance had been tried and had failed. 

The new king, being Dutch, brought with him the commercial and theological wisdom for which 
his country was noted. The Bank of England was created; the national debt was made into a secure 
investment, no longer liable to repudiation at the caprice of the monarch. The Act of Toleration, 
while leaving Catholics and Nonconfonnists subject to various disabilities, put an end to actual 
persecution. Foreign policy became resolutely anti-French, and remained so, with brief 
intermissions, until the defeat of Napoleon. 


- 603 - 



CHAPTER XIII Locke's Theory of Knowledge 


JOHN LOCKE ( 1637-1704) is the apostle of the Revolution of 1688, the most moderate and the 
most successful of all revolutions. Its aims were modest, but they were exactly achieved, and no 
subsequent revolution has hitherto been found necessary in England. Locke faithfully embodies its 
spirit, and most of his works appeared within a few years of 1688. His chief work in theoretical 
philosophy, the Essay Concerning Human Understanding, was finished in 1687 and published in 
1690. His First Letter on Toleration was originally published in Latin in 1689, in Holland, to 
which country Locke had found it prudent to withdraw in 1683. Two further letters on Toleration 
were published in 1690 and 1692. His two Treatises on Government were licensed for printing in 
1689, and published soon afterwards. His book on Education was published in 1693. Although his 
life was long, all his influential writings are confined to the few years from 1687 to 1693. 
Successful revolutions are stimulating to those who believe in them. 

Locke's father was a Puritan, who fought on the side of Parliament. In the time of Cromwell, when 
Locke was at Oxford, the university was still scholastic in its philosophy; Locke disliked both 
scholasticism and the fanaticism of the Independents. He was much influenced by Descartes. He 
became a physician, and his patron was Lord Shaftesbury, Dryden’s "Achitophel." When 
Shaftesbury fell in 1683, Locke fled with him to Holland, and remained there until the Revolution. 
After the Revolution, except for a few years during which he was employed at the Board of Trade, 
his life was devoted to literary work and to numerous controversies arising out of his books. 

The years before the Revolution of 1688, when Locke could not, without grave risk, take any part, 
theoretical or practical, in English politics, were spent by him in composing his Essay on the 
Human Understanding. This is his most important book, and the one upon 

- 604 - 



which his fame most securely rests; but his influence on the philosophy of politics was so great 
and so lasting that he must be treated as the founder of philosophical liberalism as much as of 
empiricism in theory of knowledge. 

Locke is the most fortunate of all philosophers. He completed his work in theoretical philosophy 
just at the moment when the government of his country fell into the hands of men who shared his 
political opinions. Both in practice and in theory, the views which he advocated were held, for 
many years to come, by the most vigorous and influential politicians and philosophers. His 
political doctrines, with the developments due to Montesquieu, are embedded in the American 
Constitution, and are to be seen at work whenever there is a dispute between President and 
Congress. The British Constitution was based upon his doctrines until about fifty years ago, and 
so was that which the French adopted in 1871. 

His influence in eighteenth-century France, which was immense, was primarily due to Voltaire, 
who as a young man spent some time in England, and interpreted English ideas to his compatriots 
in the Lettres philosophiques. The philosophes and the moderate reformers followed him; the 
extreme revolutionaries followed Rousseau. His French followers, rightly or wrongly, believed in 
an intimate connection between his theory of knowledge and his politics. 

In England this connection is less evident. Of his two most eminent followers, Berkeley was 
politically unimportant, and Hume was a Tory who set forth his reactionary views in his History 
of England. But after the time of Kant, when German idealism began to influence English 
thought, there came to be again a connection between philosophy and politics: in the main, the 
philosophers who followed the Germans were Conservative, while the Benthamites, who were 
Radical, were in the tradition of Locke. The correlation, however, is not invariable; T. H. Green, 
for example, was a Liberal but an idealist. 

Not only Locke's valid opinions, but even his errors, were useful in practice. Take, for example, 
his doctrine as to primary and secondary qualities. The primary qualities are defined as those that 
are inseparable from body, and are enumerated as solidity, extension, figure, motion or rest, and 
number. The secondary qualities are all the rest: colour, sounds, smells, etc. The primary qualities, 
he maintains, are actually in bodies; the secondary qualities, on the contrary, are 


- 605 - 



only in the percipient. Without the eye, there would be no colours; without the ear, no sounds, and 
so on. For Locke's view as to secondary qualities there are good grounds— jaundice, blue 
spectacles, etc. But Berkeley pointed out that the same arguments apply to primary qualities. Ever 
since Berkeley, Locke's dualism on this point has been philosophically out of date. Nevertheless, it 
dominated practical physics until the rise of quantum theory in our own day. Not only was it 
assumed, explicitly or tacitly, by physicists, but it proved fruitful as a source of many very 
important discoveries. The theory that the physical world consists only of matter in motion was 
the basis of the accepted theories of sound, heat, light, and electricity. Pragmatically, the theory 
was useful, however mistaken it may have been theoretically. This is typical of Locke's doctrines. 

Locke's philosophy, as it appears in the Essay, has throughout certain merits and certain demerits. 
Both alike were useful: the demerits are such only from a theoretical standpoint. He is always 
sensible, and always willing to sacrifice logic rather than become paradoxical. He enunciates 
general principles which, as the reader can hardly fail to perceive, are capable of leading to strange 
consequences; but whenever the strange consequences seem about to appear, Locke blandly 
refrains from drawing them. To a logician this is irritating; to a practical man, it is a proof of 
sound judgement. Since the world is what it is, it is clear that valid reasoning from sound 
principles cannot lead to error; but a principle may be so nearly true as to deserve theoretical 
respect, and yet may lead to practical consequences which we feel to be absurd. There is therefore 
a justification for common sense in philosophy, but only as showing that our theoretical principles 
cannot be quite correct so long as their consequences are condemned by an appeal to common 
sense which we feel to be irresistible. The theorist may retort that common sense is no more 
infallible than logic. But this retort, though made by Berkeley and Hume, would have been wholly 
foreign to Locke's intellectual temper. 

A characteristic of Locke, which descended from him to the whole Liberal movement, is lack of 
dogmatism. Some few certainties he takes over from his predecessors: our own existence, the 
existence of God, and the truth of mathematics. But wherever his doctrines differ from those of 
his forerunners, they are to the effect that truth is hard to ascertain, and that a rational man will 
hold his opinions with 


- 606 - 



some measure of doubt. This temper of mind is obviously connected with religious toleration, 
with the success of parliamentary democracy, with laissez-faire, and with the whole system of 
liberal maxims. Although he is a deeply religious man, a devout believer in Christianity who 
accepts revelation as a source of knowledge, he nevertheless hedges round professed revelations 
with rational safeguards. On one occasion he says: "The bare testimony of revelation is the highest 
certainty," but on another he says: "Revelation must be judged by reason." Thus in the end reason 
remains supreme. 

His chapter "Of Enthusiasm" is instructive in this connection. "Enthusiasm" had not then the same 
meaning as it has now; it meant the belief in a personal revelation to a religious leader or to his 
followers. It was a characteristic of the sects that had been defeated at the Restoration. When there 
is a multiplicity of such personal revelations, all inconsistent with each other, truth, or what passes 
as such, becomes purely personal, and loses its social character. Love of truth, which Locke 
considers essential, is a very different thing from love of some particular doctrine which is 
proclaimed as the truth. One unerring mark of love of truth, he says, is "not entertaining any 
proposition with greater assurance than the proofs it is built upon will warrant." Forwardness to 
dictate, he says, shows failure of love of truth. "Enthusiasm, laying by reason, would set up 
revelation without it; whereby in effect it takes away both reason and revelation, and substitutes in 
the room of it the ungrounded fancies of a man’s own brain." Men who suffer from melancholy or 
conceit are likely to have "persuasions of immediate intercourse with the Deity." Hence odd 
actions and opinions acquire Divine sanction, which flatters "men's laziness, ignorance, and 
vanity." He concludes the chapter with the maxim already quoted, that "revelation must be judged 
of by reason." 

What Locke means by "reason" is to be gathered from his whole book. There is, it is true, a 
chapter called "Of Reason," but this is mainly concerned to prove that reason does not consist of 
syllogistic reasoning, and is summed up in the sentence: "God has not been so sparing to men to 
make them barely two-legged creatures, and left it to Aristotle to make them rational." Reason, as 
Locke uses the tenn, consists of two parts: first, an inquiry as to what things we know with 
certainty; second, an investigation of propositions which it is wise to accept in practice, although 
they have only probability and not 


- 607 - 



certainty in their favour. "The grounds of probability," he says, "are two: conformity with our own 
experience, or the testimony of other's experience." The King of Siam, he remarks, ceased to 
believe what Europeans told him when they mentioned ice. 

In his chapter "Of Degrees of Assent" he says that the degree of assent we give to any proposition 
should depend upon the grounds of probability in its favour. After pointing out that we must often 
act upon probabilities that fall short of certainty, he says that the right use of this consideration "is 
mutual charity and forbearance. Since therefore it is unavoidable to the greatest part of men, if not 
all, to have several opinions, without certain and indubitable proofs of their truth; and it carries 
too great an imputation of ignorance, lightness, or folly, for men to quit and renounce their former 
tenets presently upon the offer of an argument which they cannot immediately answer and show 
the insufficiency of; it would, methinks, become all men to maintain peace and the common 
offices of humanity and friendship in the diversity of opinions, since we cannot reasonably expect 
that any one should readily and obsequiously quit his own opinion, and embrace ours with a blind 
resignation to an authority which the understanding of man acknowledges not. For, however it 
may often mistake, it can own no other guide but reason, nor blindly submit to the will and 
dictates of another. If he you would bring over to your sentiments be one that examines before he 
assents, you must give him leave at his leisure to go over the account again, and, recalling what is 
out of his mind, examine the particulars, to see on which side the advantage lies; and if he will not 
think over arguments of weight enough to engage him anew in so much pains, it is but what we do 
often ourselves in the like case; and we should take it amiss if others should prescribe to us what 
points we should study: and if he be one who wishes to take his opinions upon trust, how can we 
imagine that he should renounce those tenets which time and custom have so settled in his mind 
that he thinks them self-evident, and of an unquestionable certainty; or which he takes to be 
impressions he has received from God himself, or from men sent by him? How can we expect, I 
say, that opinions thus settled should be given up to the arguments or authority of a stranger or 
adversary? especially if there be any suspicion of interest or design, as there never fails to be 
where men find themselves ill-treated. We should do well to commiserate our 


- 608 - 



mutual ignorance, and endeavour to remove it in all the gentle and fair ways of information, and 
not instantly treat others ill as obstinate and perverse because they will not renounce their own 
and receive our opinions, or at least those we would force upon them, when it is more than 
probable that we are no less obstinate in not embracing some of theirs. For where is the man 
that has uncontestable evidence of the truth of all that he holds, or of the falsehood of all he 
condemns; or can say, that he has examined to the bottom all his own or other men's opinions? 
The necessity of believing without knowledge, nay, often upon very slight grounds, in this 
fleeting state of action and blindness we are in, should make us more busy and careful to inform 
ourselves than to restrain others. . . . There is reason to think, that if men were better instructed 
themselves, they would be less imposing on others." 

I have dealt hitherto only with the latest chapters of the Essay, where Locke is drawing the 
moral from his earlier theoretical investigation of the nature and limitations of human 
knowledge. It is time now to examine what he has to say on this more purely philosophical 
subject. 

Locke is, as a rule, contemptuous of metaphysics. A propos of some speculation of Leibniz's, he 
writes to a friend: "You and I have had enough of this k in d of fiddling." The conception of 
substance, which was dominant in the metaphysics of his time, he considers vague and not 
useful, but he does not venture to reject it wholly. He allows the validity of metaphysical 
arguments for the existence of God, but he does not dwell on them, and seems somewhat 
uncomfortable about them. Whenever he is expressing new ideas, and not merely repeating 
what is traditional, he thinks in terms of concrete detail rather than of large abstractions. His 
philosophy is piecemeal, like scientific work, not statuesque and all of a piece, like the great 
Continental systems of the seventeenth century. 

Locke may be regarded as the founder of empiricism, which is the doctrine that all our 
knowledge (with the possible exception of logic and mathematics) is derived from experience. 
Accordingly the first book of the Essay is concerned in arguing, as against Plato, Descartes, and 
the scholastics, that there are no innate ideas or principles. In the 


* Essay Concerning Human Understanding, Book IV, Ch. XVI, Sec. 4. 


- 609 - 


second book he sets to work to show, in detail, how experience gives rise to various kinds of 
ideas. Having rejected innate ideas, he says: 

"Let us then suppose the mind to be, as we say, white paper, void of all characters, without any 
ideas; how comes it to be furnished? Whence comes it by that vast store, which the busy and 
boundless fancy of man has painted on it with an almost endless variety? Whence has it all the 
materials of reason and knowledge? To this I answer in one word, from experience: in that all our 
knowledge is founded, and from that it ultimately derives itself (Book II, Ch. I, Sec. 2). 

Our ideas are derived from two sources, (a) sensation, and ( b ) perception of the operation of our 
own mind, which may be called "internal sense." Since we can only think by means of ideas, and 
since all ideas come from experience, it is evident that none of our knowledge can antedate 
experience. 

Perception, he says, is "the first step and degree towards knowledge, and the inlet of all the 
materials of it." This may seem, to a modern, almost a truism, since it has become part of educated 
common sense, at least in English-speaking countries. But in his day the mind was supposed to 
know all sorts of things a priori, and the complete dependence of knowledge upon perception, 
which he proclaimed, was a new and revolutionary doctrine. Plato, in the Theaetetus, had set to 
work to refute the identification of knowledge with perception, and from his time onwards almost 
all philosophers, down to and including Descartes and Leibniz, had taught that much of our most 
valuable knowledge is not derived from experience. Locke's thorough-going empiricism was 
therefore a bold innovation. 

The third book of the Essay deals with words, and is concerned, in the main, to show that what 
metaphysicians present as knowledge about the world is purely verbal. Chapter III, "Of General 
Terms," takes up an extreme nominalist position on the subject of universals. All things that exist 
are particulars, but we can frame general ideas, such as "man," that are applicable to many 
particulars, and to these general ideas we can give names. Their generality consists solely in the 
fact that they are, or may be, applicable to a variety of particular things; in their own being, as 
ideas in our minds, they are just as particular as everything else that exists. 

Chapter VI of Book III, "Of the Names of Substances," is concerned to refute the scholastic 
doctrine of essence. Things may have 


- 610 - 



a real essence, which will consist of their physical constitution, but this is in the main u nkn own 
to us, and is not the "essence" of which scholastics speak. Essence, as we can know it, is purely 
verbal; it consists merely in the definition of a general term. To argue, for instance, as to 
whether the essence of body is only extension, or is extension plus solidity, is to argue about 
words: we may define the word "body" either way, and no hann can result so long as we adhere 
to our definition. Distinct species are not a fact of nature, but of language; they are "distinct 
complex ideas with distinct names annexed to them." There are, it is true, differing things in 
nature, but the differences proceed by continuous gradations: "the boundaries of the species, 
whereby men sort them, are made by men." He proceeds to give instances of monstrosities, 
concerning which it was doubtful whether they were men or not. This point of view was not 
generally accepted until Darwin persuaded men to adopt the theory of evolution by gradual 
changes. Only those who have allowed themselves to be afflicted by the scholastics will realize 
how much metaphysical lumber it sweeps away. 

Empiricism and idealism alike are faced with a problem to which, so far, philosophy has found 
no satisfactory solution. This is the problem of showing how we have knowledge of other 
things than ourself and the operations of our own mind. Locke considers this problem, but what 
he says is very obviously unsatisfactory. In one place jywe are told: "Since the mind, in all its 
thoughts and reasonings, hath no other immediate object but its own ideas, which it alone does 
or can contemplate, it is evident that our knowledge is only conversant about them." And again: 
"Knowledge is the perception of the agreement or disagreement of two ideas." From this it 
would seem to follow immediately that we cannot kn ow of the existence of other people, or of 
the physical world, for these, if they exist, are not merely ideas in any mind. Each one of us, 
accordingly, must, so far as knowledge is concerned, be shut up in himself, and cut off from all 
contact with the outer world. 

This, however, is a paradox, and Locke will have nothing to do with paradoxes. Accordingly, in 
another chapter, he sets forth a different theory, quite inconsistent with the earlier one. We 
have, he 


* Op. cit., Book IV, Ch. I. 


- 611 - 


tells us, three kinds of knowledge of real existence. Our knowledge of our own existence is 
intuitive, our knowledge of God's existence is demonstrative, and our knowledge of things present 
to sense is sensitive (Book IV, Ch. III). 

In the next chapter, he becomes more or less aware of the inconsistency. He suggests that some 
one might say: "If knowledge consists in agreement of ideas, the enthusiast and the sober man are 
on a level." He replies: "Not so where ideas agree with things." He proceeds to argue that all 
simple ideas must agree with things, since "the mind, as has been showed, can by no means make 
to itself' any simple ideas, these being all "the product of things operating on the mind in a natural 
way." And as regards complex ideas of substances, "all our complex ideas of them must be such, 
and such only, as are made up of such simple ones as have been discovered to coexist in nature." 
Again, we can have no knowledge except (1) by intuition, (2) by reason, examining the agreement 
or disagreement of two ideas, (3) "by sensation, perceiving the existence of particular things" 
(Book IV, Ch. Ill, Sec. 2). 

In all this, Locke assumes it known that certain mental occurrences, which he calls sensations, 
have causes outside themselves, and that these causes, at least to some extent and in certain 
respects, resemble the sensations which are their effects. But how, consistently with the principles 
of empiricism, is this to be known? We experience the sensations, but not their causes; our 
experience will be exactly the same if our sensations arise spontaneously. The belief that 
sensations have causes, and still more the belief that they resemble their causes, is one which, if 
maintained, must be maintained on grounds wholly independent of experience. The view that 
"knowledge is the perception of the agreement or disagreement of two ideas" is the one that Locke 
is entitled to, and his escape from the paradoxes that it entails is effected by means of an 
inconsistency so gross that only his resolute adherence to common sense could have made him 
blind to it. 

This difficulty has troubled empiricism down to the present day. Hume got rid of it by dropping 
the assumption that sensations have external causes, but even he retained this assumption 
whenever he forgot his own principles, which was very often. His fundamental maxim, "no idea 
without an antecedent impression," which he takes over from Locke, is only plausible so long as 
we think of impressions 


- 612 - 



as having outside causes, which the very word "impression" irresistibly suggests. And at the 
moments when Hume achieves some degree of consistency he is wildly paradoxical. 

No one has yet succeeded in inventing a philosophy at once credible and self-consistent. Locke 
aimed at credibility, and achieved it at the expense of consistency. Most of the great 
philosophers have done the opposite. A philosophy which is not self-consistent cannot be 
wholly true, but a philosophy which is self-consistent can very well be wholly false. The most 
fruitful philosophies have contained glaring inconsistencies, but for that very reason have been 
partially true. There is no reason to suppose that a self-consistent system contains more truth 
than one which, like Locke's, is obviously more or less wrong. 

Locke's ethical doctrines are interesting, partly on their own account, partly as an anticipation of 
Bentham. When I speak of his ethical doctrines, I do not mean his moral disposition as a 
practical man, but his general theories as to how men act and how they should act. Like 
Bentham, Locke was a man filled with kindly feeling, who yet held that everybody (including 
himself) must always be moved, in action, solely by desire for his own happiness or pleasure. A 
few quotations will make this clear. 

"Things are good or evil only in relation to pleasure or pain. That we call 'good' which is apt to 
cause or increase pleasure, or diminish pain, in us." 

"What is it moves desire? I answer, happiness, and that alone." 

"Happiness, in its full extent, is the utmost pleasure we are capable of." 

"The necessity of pursuing true happiness [is] the foundation of all liberty." 

"The preference of vice to virtue [is] a manifest wrong judgement." 

"The government of our passions [is] the right improvement of liberty." 

The last of these statements depends, it would seem, upon the doctrine of rewards and 
punishments in the next world. God has laid down certain moral rules; those who follow them 
go to heaven, and 


* The above quotations are from Book II, Ch. XX. 


- 613 - 


those who break them risk going to hell. The prudent pleasure-seeker will therefore be virtuous. 
With the decay of the belief that sin leads to hell, it has become more difficult to make a purely 
self-regarding argument in favour of a virtuous life. Bentham, who was a freethinker, substituted 
the human lawgiver in place of God: it was the business of laws and social institutions to make a 
hannony between public and private interests, so that each man, in pursuing his own happiness, 
should be compelled to minister to the general happiness. But this is less satisfactory than the 
reconciliation of public and private interests effected by means of heaven and hell, both because 
lawgivers are not always wise or virtuous, and because human governments are not omniscient. 

Locke has to admit, what is obvious, that men do not always act in the way which, on a rational 
calculation, is likely to secure them a maximum of pleasure. We value present pleasure more than 
future pleasure, and pleasure in the near future more than pleasure in the distant future. It may be 
said— this is not said by Locke— that the rate of interest is a quantitative measure of the general 
discounting of future pleasures. If the prospect of spending $1000 a year hence were as delightful 
as the thought of spending it today, I should not need to be paid for postponing my pleasure. 

Locke admits that devout believers often commit sins which, by their own creed, put them in 
danger of hell. We all know people who put off going to the dentist longer than they would if they 
were engaged in the rational pursuit of pleasure. Thus, even if pleasure or the avoidance of pain be 
our motive, it must be added that pleasures lose their attractiveness and pains their terrors in 
proportion to their distance in the future. 

Since it is only in the long run that, according to Locke, self-interest and the general interest 
coincide, it becomes important that men should be guided, as far as possible, by their long-run 
interests. That is to say, men should be prudent. Prudence is the one virtue which remains to be 
preached, for every lapse from virtue is a failure of prudence. Emphasis on prudence is 
characteristic of liberalism. It is connected with the rise of capitalism, for the prudent became rich 
while the imprudent became or remained poor. It is connected also with certain forms of 
Protestant piety: virtue with a view to heaven is psychologically very analogous to saving with a 
view to investment. 

Belief in the hannony between private and public interests is 


- 614 - 



characteristic of liberalism, and long survived the theological foundation that it had in Locke. 

Locke states that liberty depends upon the necessity of pursuing true happiness and upon the 
government of our passions. This opinion he derives from his doctrine that private and public 
interests are identical in the long run, though not necessarily over short periods. It follows from 
this doctrine that, given a community of citizens who are all both pious and prudent, they will all 
act, given liberty, in a manner to promote the general good. There will be no need of human laws 
to restrain them, since divine laws will suffice. The hitherto virtuous man who is tempted to 
become a highwayman will say to himself: "I might escape the human magistrate, but I could not 
escape punishment at the hands of the Divine Magistrate." He will accordingly renounce his 
nefarious schemes, and live as virtuously as if he were sure of being caught by the police. Legal 
liberty, therefore, is only completely possible where both prudence and piety are universal; 
elsewhere, the restraints imposed by the criminal law are indispensable. 

Locke. states repeatedly that morality is capable of demonstration, but he does not develop this 
idea so fully as could be wished. The most important passage is: 

"Morality capable of demonstration. The idea of a Supreme Being, infinite in power, goodness, 
and wisdom, whose workmanship we are, and on whom we depend; and the idea of ourselves, as 
understanding, rational beings, being such as are clear in us, would, I suppose, if duly considered 
and pursued, afford such foundations of our duty and rules of action as might place morality 
among the sciences capable of demonstration: wherein I doubt not, but from selfevident 
propositions, by necessary consequences, as incontestable as those in mathematics, the measures 
of right and wrong might be made out, to any one that will apply himself with the same 
indifference and attention to the one as he does to the other of these sciences. The relation of other 
modes may certainly be perceived, as well as those of number and extension: and I cannot see why 
they should not also be capable of demonstration, if due methods were thought on to examine or 
pursue their agreement or disagreement. 'Where there is no property, there is no injustice,’ is a 
proposition as certain as any demonstration in Euclid: for the idea of property 


- 615 - 



being a right to anything, and the idea to which the name ’injustice' is given being the invasion 
or violation of that right, it is evident that these ideas being thus established, and these names 
annexed to them, I can as certainly know this proposition to be true as that a triangle has three 
angles equal to two right ones. Again: 'No government allows absolute liberty:' the idea of 
government being the establishment of society upon certain rules or laws, which require 
conformity to them; and the idea of absolute liberty being for any one to do whatever he 
pleases: I am as capable of being certain of the truth of this proposition as of any in the 
mathematics." jy 

This passage is puzzling because, at first, it seems to make moral rules dependent upon God's 
decrees, while in the instances that are given it is suggested that moral rules are analytic. I 
suppose that, in fact, Locke thought some parts of ethics analytic and others dependent upon 
God's decrees. Another puzzle is that the instances given do not seem to be ethical propositions 
at all. 

There is another difficulty which one could wish to see considered. It is generally held by 
theologians that God's decrees are not arbitrary, but are inspired by His goodness and wisdom. 
This requires that there should be some concept of goodness antecedent to God's decrees, which 
has led Him to make just those decrees rather than any others. What this concept may be, it is 
impossible to discover from Locke. What he says is that a prudent man will act in such and such 
ways, since otherwise God will punish him; but he leaves us completely in the dark as to why 
punishment should be attached to certain acts rather than to their opposites. 

Locke's ethical doctrines are, of course, not defensible. Apart from the fact that there is 
something revolting in a system which regards prudence as the only virtue, there are other, less 
emotional, objections to his theories. 

In the first place, to say that men only desire pleasure is to put the cart before the horse. 
Whatever I may happen to desire, I shall feel pleasure in obtaining it; but as a rule the pleasure 
is due to the desire, not the desire to the pleasure. It is possible, as happens with masochists, to 
desire pain; in that case, there is still pleasure in the gratification of the desire, but it is mixed 
with its opposite. Even in Locke's own 


Op. cit., Book IV, Ch. Ill, Sec. 18. 


- 616 - 


doctrine, it is not pleasure as such that is desired, since a proximate pleasure is more desired than 
a remote one. If morality is to be deduced from the psychology of desire, as Locke and his 
disciples attempt to do, there can be no reason for deprecating the discounting of distant pleasures, 
or for urging prudence as a moral duty. His argument, in a nutshell, is: "We only desire pleasure. 
But, in fact, many men desire, not pleasure as such, but proximate pleasure. This contradicts our 
doctrine that they desire pleasure as such, and is therefore wicked." Almost all philosophers, in 
their ethical systems, first lay down a false doctrine, and then argue that wickedness consists in 
acting in a manner that proves it false, which would be impossible if the doctrine were true. Of 
this pattern Locke affords an example. 

CHAPTER XIV Locke’s Political Philosophy 
A. THE HEREDITARY PRINCIPLE 

IN the years 1689 and 1690, just after the Revolution of 1688, Locke wrote his two Treatises on 
Government, of which the second especially is very important in the history of political ideas. 

The first of these two treatises is a criticism of the doctrine of hereditary power. It is a reply to Sir 
Robert Filmer Patriarchal or The Natural Power of Kings, which was published in 1680, but 
written under Charles I. Sir Robert Filmer, who was a devout upholder of the divine right of 
kings, had the misfortune to live till 1653, and must have suffered acutely from the execution of 
Charles I and the victory of Cromwell. But Patriarcha was written before these sad events, 
thought not before the Civil War, so that it naturally shows awareness of the existence of 
subversive doctrines. Such doctrines, as Filmer points out, were not new in 1640. In fact, both 
Protestant and Catholic divines, in their contest with Catholic and 

-617- 



Protestant monarchs respectively, had vigorously affirmed the right of subjects to resist tyrannical 
princes, and their writings supplied Sir Robert with abundant material for controversy. 

Sir Robert Filmer was knighted by Charles I, and his house is said to have been plundered by the 
Parliamentarians ten times. He thinks it not unlikely that Noah sailed up the Mediterranean and 
allotted Africa, Asia, and Europe to Ham, Shem, and Japheth respectively. He held that, by the 
English Constitution, the Lords only give counsel to the king, and the Commons have even less 
power; the king, he says, alone makes the laws, which proceed solely from his will. The king, 
according to Filmer, is perfectly free from all human control, and cannot be bound by the acts of 
his predecessors, or even by his own, for "impossible it is in nature that a man should give a law 
unto himself." 

Filmer, as these opinions show, belonged to the most extreme section of the Divine Right party. 

Patriarcha begins by combating the "common opinion" that "mankind is naturally endowed and 
born with freedom from all subjection, and at liberty to choose what form of government it please, 
and the power which any one man hath over others was at first bestowed according to the 
discretion of the multitude." "This tenet," he says, "was first hatched in the schools." The truth, 
according to him, is quite different; it is, that originally God bestowed the kingly power upon 
Adam, from whom it descended to his heirs, and ultimately reached the various monarchs of 
modem times. Kings now, he assures us, "either are, or are to be reputed, the next heirs to those 
first progenitors who were at first the natural parents of the whole people." Our first parent, it 
seems, did not adequately appreciate his privilege as universal monarch, for "the desire of liberty 
was the first cause of the fall of Adam." The desire of liberty is a sentiment which Sir Robert 
Filmer regards as impious. 

The claims made by Charles I, and by his protagonists on his behalf, were in excess of what earlier 
times would have conceded to kings. Filmer points out that Parsons, the English Jesuit, and 
Buchanan, the Scotch Calvinist, who agree in almost nothing else, both maintain that sovereigns 
can be deposed by the people for misgovernment. Parsons, of course, was thinking of the 
Protestant Queen Elizabeth, and Buchanan of the Catholic Mary Queen of Scots. The doctrine of 


- 618 - 



Buchanan was sanctioned by success, but that of Parsons was disproved by his colleague 
Campion's execution. 

Even before the Reformation, theologians tended to believe in setting limits to kingly power. This 
was part of the battle between the Church and the State which raged throughout Europe during 
most of the Middle Ages. In this battle, the State depended upon armed force, the Church upon 
cleverness and sanctity. As long as the Church had both these merits, it won; when it came to have 
cleverness only, it lost. But the things which eminent and holy men had said against the power of 
kings remained on record. Though intended in the interests of the Pope, they could be used to 
support the rights of the people to self-government. "The subtle schoolmen," says Filmer, "to be 
sure to thrust down the king below the Pope, thought it the safest course to advance the people 
above the king, so that the papal power might take the place of the regal." He quotes the 
theologian Bellannine as saying that secular power is bestowed by men (i.e., not by God), and "is 
in the people unless they bestow it on a prince"; thus Bellannine, according to Filmer, "makes 
God the immediate author of a democratical estate"— which sounds to him as shocking as it would 
to a modem plutocrat to say that God is the immediate author of Bolshevism. 

Filmer derives political power, not from any contract, nor yet from any consideration of the public 
good, but entirely from the authority of a father over his children. His view is: that the source of 
regal authority is subjection of children to parents; that the patriarchs in Genesis were monarchs; 
that kings are the heirs of Adam, or at least are to be regarded as such; that the natural rights of a 
king are the same as those of a father; and that, by nature, sons are never free of paternal power, 
even when the son is adult and the parent is in his dotage. 

This whole theory seems to a modem mind so fantastic that it is hard to believe it was seriously 
maintained. We are not accustomed to deriving political rights from the story of Adam and Eve. 
We hold it obvious that parental power should cease completely when the son or daughter reaches 
the age of twenty-one, and that before that it should be very strictly limited both by the State and 
by the right of independent initiative which the young have gradually acquired. We recognize that 
the mother has rights at least equal to those of the 


- 619 - 



father. But apart from all these considerations, it would not occur to any modern man outside 
Japan to suppose that political power should be in any way assimilated to that of parents over 
children. In Japan, it is true, a theory closely similar to Filmer's is still held, and must be taught by 
all professors and school-teachers. The Mikado can trace his descent from the Sun Goddess, 
whose heir he is; other Japanese are also descended from her, but belong to cadet branches of her 
family. Therefore the Mikado is divine, and all resistance to him is impious. This theory was, in 
the main, invented in 1868, but is now alleged in Japan to have been handed down by tradition 
ever since the creation of the world. 

The attempt to impose a similar theory upon Europe— of which attempt Filmer Patriarcha is part— 
was a failure. Why? The acceptance of such a theory is in no way repugnant to human nature; for 
example, it was held, apart from Japan, by the ancient Egyptians, and by the Mexicans and 
Peruvians before the Spanish conquest. At a certain stage of human development it is natural. 
Stuart England had passed this stage, but modem Japan has not. 

The defeat of theories of divine right, in England, was due to two main causes. One was the 
multiplicity of religions; the other was the conflict for power between the monarchy, the 
aristocracy, and the higher bourgeoisie. As for religion: the king, since the reign of Henry VIII, 
was the head of the Church of England, which was opposed both to Rome and to most of the 
Protestant sects. The Church of England boasted of being a compromise: the Preface to the 
Authorized Version begins "it hath been the wisdom of the Church of England, ever since the first 
compiling of her public liturgy, to keep the mean between two extremes." On the whole this 
compromise suited most people. Queen Mary and King James II tried to drag the country over to 
Rome, and the victors in the Civil War tried to drag it over to Geneva, but these attempts failed, 
and after 1688 the power of the Church of England was unchallenged. Nevertheless, its opponents 
survived. The Nonconformists, especially, were vigorous men, and were numerous among the rich 
merchants and bankers whose power was continually increasing. 

The theological position of the king was somewhat peculiar, for he was not only head of the 
Church of England, but also of the Church of Scotland. In England, he had to believe in bishops 
and reject Cal. 


- 620 - 



vinism; in Scotland, he had to reject bishops and believe in Calvinism. The Stuarts had genuine 
religious convictions, which made this ambiguous attitude impossible for them, and caused them 
even more trouble in Scotland than in England. But after 1688 political convenience led kings to 
acquiesce in professing two religions at once. This militated against zeal, and made it difficult to 
regard them as divine persons. In any case, neither Catholics nor Nonconformists could acquiesce 
in any religious claims on behalf of the monarchy. 

The three parties of king, aristocracy, and rich middle class made different combinations at 
different times. Under Edward IV and Louis XI, king and middle class combined against the 
aristocracy; under Louis XIV, king and aristocracy combined against the middle class; in England 
in 1688, aristocracy and middle class combined against the king. When the king had one of the 
other parties on his side, he was strong; when they combined against him, he was weak. 

For these reasons among others, Locke had no difficulty in demolishing Filmer's arguments. 

So far as reasoning is concerned, Locke has, of course, an easy task. He points out that, if parental 
power is what is concerned, the mother's power should be equal to the father's. He lay stress on the 
injustice of primogeniture, which is unavoidable if inheritance is to be the basis of monarchy. He 
makes play with the absurdity of supposing that actual monarchs are, in any real sense, the heirs of 
Adam. Adam can have only one heir, but no one knows who he is. Would Filmer maintain, he 
asks, that, if the true heir could be discovered, all existing monarchs should lay their crowns at his 
feet? If Filmer's basis for monarchy were accepted, all kings, except at most one, would be 
usurpers, and would have no right to demand the obedience of their de facto subjects. Moreover 
paternal power, he says, is temporary, and extends not to life or property. 

For such reasons, apart from more fundamental grounds, heredity cannot, according to Locke, be 
accepted as the basis of legitimate political power. Accordingly, in his Second Treatise on 
Government he seeks a more defensible basis. 

The hereditary principle has almost vanished from politics. During my lifetime, the emperors of 
Brazil, China, Russia, Gennany, and Austria have disappeared, to be replaced by dictators who do 
not aim at the foundation of a hereditary dynasty. Aristocracy has lost its 


- 621 - 



privileges throughout Europe, except in England, where they have become little more than a 
historical form. All this, in most countries, is very recent, and has much to do with the rise of 
dictatorships, since the traditional basis of power has been swept away, and the habits of mind 
required for the successful practice of democracy have not had time to grow up. There is one great 
institution that has never had any hereditary element, namely, the Catholic Church. We may 
expect the dictatorships, if they survive, to develop gradually a form of government analogous to 
that of the Church. This has already happened in the case of the great corporations in America, 
which have, or had until Pearl Harbor, powers almost equal to those of the government. 

It is curious that the rejection of the hereditary principle in politics has had almost no effect in the 
economic sphere in democratic countries. (In totalitarian states, economic power has been 
absorbed by political power.) We still think it natural that a man should leave his property to his 
children; that is to say, we accept the hereditary principle as regards economic power while 
rejecting it as regards political power. Political dynasties have disappeared, but economic 
dynasties survive. I am not at the moment arguing either for or against this different treatment of 
the two forms of power; I am merely pointing out that it exists, and that most men are unconscious 
of it. When you consider how natural it seems to us that the power over the lives of others 
resulting from great wealth should be hereditary, you will understand better how men like Sir 
Robert Filmer could take the same view as regards the power of kings, and how important was the 
innovation represented by men who thought as Locke did. 

To understand how Filmer’s theory could be believed, and how Locke's contrary theory could 
seem revolutionary, we have only to reflect that a kingdom was regarded then as a landed estate is 
regarded now. The owner of land has various important legal rights, the chief of which is the 
power of choosing who shall be on the land. Ownership can be transmitted by inheritance, and we 
feel that the man who has inherited an estate has a just claim to all the privileges that the law 
allows him in consequence. Yet at bottom his position is the same as that of the monarchs whose 
claims Sir Robert Filmer defends. There are at the present day in California a number of huge 
estates the tide to which is derived from actual or alleged grants by the king 


- 622 - 



of Spain. He was only in a position to make such grants (a) because Spain accepted views 
similar to Filmer’s, and (b) because the Spaniards were able to defeat the Indians in battle. 
Nevertheless we hold the heirs of those to whom he made grants to have a just title. Perhaps in 
future this will seem as fantastic as Filmer seems now. 

B. THE STATE OF NATURE, AND NATURAL LAW 

Locke begins his second Treatise on Government by saying that, having shown the 
impossibility of deriving the authority of government from that of a father, he will now set forth 
what he conceives to be the true origin of government. 

He begins by supposing what he calls a "state of nature," antecedent to all human government. 
In this state there is a "law of nature," but the law of nature consists of divine commands, and is 
not imposed by any human legislator. It is not clear how far the state of nature is, for Locke, a 
mere illustrative hypothesis, and how far he supposes it to have had a historical existence; but I 
am afraid that he tended to think of it as a stage that had actually occurred. Men emerged from 
the state of nature by means of a social contract which instituted civil government. This also he 
regarded as more or less historical. But for the moment it is the state of nature that concerns us. 

What Locke has to say about the state of nature and the law of nature is, in the main, not 
original, but a repetition of medieval scholastic doctrines. Thus Saint Thomas Aquinas says: 

"Every law framed by man bears the character of a law exactly to that extent to which it is 
derived from the law of nature. But if on any point it is in conflict with the law of nature, it at 
once ceases to be a law; it is a mere perversion of law." 

Throughout the Middle Ages, the law of nature was held to condemn "usury," i.e., lending 
money at interest. Church property was almost entirely in land, and landowners have always 
been borrowers rather than lenders. But when Protestantism arose, its support— especially the 
support of Calvinism— came chiefly from the rich middle class, who were lenders rather than 
borrowers. Accordingly first Calvin, then other Protestants, and finally the Catholic Church, 
sanctioned 


* Quoted by Tawney in Religion and the Rise of Capitalism. 


- 623 - 


"usury." Thus natural law came to be differently conceived, but no one doubted there being such a 
thing. 

Many doctrines which survived the belief in natural law owe their origin to it; for example, 
laissez-faire and the rights of man. These doctrines are connected, and both have their origins in 
puritanism. Two quotations given by Tawney will illustrate this. A committee of the House of 
Commons in 1604 stated: 

"All free subjects are born inheritable, as to their land, and also as to the free exercise of their 
industry, in those trades whereto they apply themselves and whereby they are to live." 

And in 1656 Joseph Lee writes: 

"It is an undeniable maxim that every one by the light of nature and reason will do that which 
makes for his greatest advantage. . . . The advancement of private persons will be the advantage of 
the public." 

Except for the words "by the light of nature and reason," this might have been written in the 
nineteenth century. 

In Locke's theory of government, I repeat, there is little that is original. In this Locke resembles 
most of the men who have won fame for their ideas. As a rule, the man who first thinks of a new 
idea is so much ahead of his time that every one thinks him silly, so that he remains obscure and is 
soon forgotten. Then, gradually, the world becomes ready for the idea, and the man who proclaims 
it at the fortunate moment gets all the credit. So it was, for example, with Darwin; poor Lord 
Monboddo was a laughing-stock. 

In regard to the state of nature, Locke was less original than Hobbes, who regarded it as one in 
which there was war of all against all, and life was nasty, brutish, and short. But Hobbes was 
reputed an atheist. The view of the state of nature and of natural law which Locke accepted from 
his predecessors cannot be freed from its theological basis; where it survives without this, as in 
much modem liberalism, it is destitute of clear logical foundation. 

The belief in a happy "state of nature" in the remote past is derived partly from the biblical 
narrative of the age of the patriarchs, partly from the classical myth of the golden age. The general 
belief in the badness of the remote past only came with the doctrine of evolution. 

The nearest thing to a definition of the state of nature to be found in Locke is the following: 


- 624 - 



"Men living together according to reason, without a common superior on earth, with authority 
to judge between them, is properly the state of nature." 

This is not a description of the life of savages, but of an imagined community of virtuous 
anarchists, who need no police or law-courts because they always obey "reason," which is the 
same as "natural law," which, in turn, consists of those laws of conduct that are held to have a 
divine origin. (For example, "Thou shalt not kill" is part of natural law, but the rule of the roads 
is not.) 

Some further quotations will make Locke's meaning clearer. 

"To understand political power right [he says], and derive it from its original, we must consider 
what state men are naturally in, and that is, a state of perfect freedom to order their actions and 
dispose of their possessions and persons, as they think fit, within the bounds of the law of 
nature; without asking leave, or depending upon the will of any other man. 

"A state also of equality, wherein all the power and jurisdiction is reciprocal, no one having 
more than another; there being nothing more evident, than that creatures of the same species 
and rank, promiscuously born to all the same advantages of nature, and the use of the same 
faculties, should also be equal one amongst another without subordination or subjection; unless 
the lord and master of them all should, by any manifest declaration of his will, set one above 
another, and confer on him, by an evident and clear appointment, an undoubted right to 
dominion and sovereignty. 

"But though this [the state of nature] be a state of liberty, yet it is not a state of licence: though 
man in that state has an uncontrollable liberty to dispose of his person or possessions, yet he has 
not liberty to destroy himself, or so much as any creature in his possession, but where some 
nobler use than its bare preservation calls for it. The state of nature has a law of nature to 
govern it, which obliges every one: and reason, which is that law, teaches all mankind, who win 
but consult it, that being all equal and independent, no one ought to harm another in his life, 

health, liberty, or possessions" ^_(for we are all God's property). 


* Cf. the Declaration of Independence. 

^ "They are his property, whose workmanship they are, made to last during his, not another's 
€ pleasure," as Locke puts it. 


- 625 - 


It presently appears, however, that, where most men are in the state of nature, there may 
nevertheless be some men who do not live according to the law of nature, and that the law of 
nature provides, up to a point, what may be done to resist such criminals. In a state of nature, we 
are told, every man can defend himself and what is his. "Who so sheddeth man’s blood, by man 
shall his blood be shed" is part of the law of nature. I may even kill a thief while he is engaged in 
stealing my property, and this right survives the institution of government, although, where there 
is government, if the thief gets away I must renounce private vengeance and resort to the law. 

The great objection to the state of nature is that, while it persists, every man is the judge in his 
own cause, since he must rely upon himself for the defence of his rights. For this evil, government 
is the remedy, but this is not a natural remedy. The state of nature, according to Locke, was 
evaded by a compact to create a government. Not any compact ends the state of nature, but only 
that of making one body politic. The various governments of independent States are now in a state 
of nature towards each other. 

The state of nature, we are told in a passage presumably directed against Hobbes, is not the same 
as a state of war, but more nearly its opposite. After explaining the right to kill a thief, on the 
ground that the thief may be deemed to be making war upon me, Locke says: 

"And here we have the plain ’difference between the state of nature and the state of war,' which, 
however some men have confounded, are as far distant, as a state of peace, good-will, mutual 
assistance and preservation, and a state of enmity, malice, violence and mutual destruction are 
from one another." 

Perhaps the law of nature must be regarded as having a wider scope than the state of nature, since 
the former deals with thieves and murderers, while in the latter there are no such malefactors. 

This, at least, suggests a way out of an apparent inconsistency in Locke, consisting in his 
sometimes representing the state of nature as one where every one is virtuous, and at other times 
discussing what may rightly be done in a state of nature to resist the aggressions of wicked men. 

Some parts of Locke's natural law are surprising. For example, he says that captives in a just war 
are slaves by the law of nature. He says also that by nature every man has a right to punish attacks 
on himself or his property, even by death. He makes no qualification, so 


- 626 - 



that if I catch a person engaged in petty pilfering I have, apparently, by the law of nature, a right to 
shoot him. 

Property is very prominent in Locke's political philosophy, and is, according to him, the chief 
reason for the institution of civil government: 

"The great and chief end of men uniting into commonwealths, and putting themselves under 
government, is the preservation of their property; to which in the state of nature there are many 
things wanting." 

The whole of this theory of the state of nature and natural law is in one sense clear but in another 
very puzzling. It is clear what Locke thought, but it is not clear how he can have thought it. 

Locke's ethic, as we saw, is utilitarian, but in his consideration of "rights" he does not bring in 
utilitarian considerations. Something of this pervades the whole philosophy of law as taught by 
lawyers. Legal rights can be defined: broadly speaking, a man has a legal right when he can appeal 
to the law to safeguard him against injury. A man has in general a legal right to his property, but if 
he has (say) an illicit store of cocaine, he has no legal remedy against a man who steals it. But the 
lawgiver has to decide what legal rights to create, and falls back naturally on the conception of 
"natural" rights, as those which the law should secure. 

I am attempting to go as far as is possible towards stating something like Locke's theory in 
untheological terms. If it is assumed that ethics, and the classification of acts as "right" and 
"wrong," is logically prior to actual law, it becomes possible to restate the theory in terms not 
involving mythical history. To arrive at the law of nature, we may put the question in this way: in 
the absence of law and government, what classes of acts by A against B justify B in retaliating 
against A, and what sort of retaliation is justified in different cases? It is generally held that no 
man can be blamed for defending himself against a murderous assault, even, if necessary, to the 
extent of killing the assailant. He may equally defend his wife and children, or, indeed, any 
member of the general public. In such cases, the existence of the law against murder becomes 
irrelevant, if, as may easily happen, the man assaulted would be dead before the aid of the police 
could be invoked; we have, therefore, to fall back on "natural" right. A man 


- 627 - 



also has a right to defend his property, though opinions differ as to the amount of injury he may 
justly inflict upon a thief. 

In the relations between States, as Locke points out, "natural" law is relevant. In what 
circumstances is war justified? So long as no international government exists, the answer to this 
question is purely ethical, not legal; it must be answered in the same way as it would be for an 
individual in a state of anarchy. 

Legal theory will be based upon the view that the "rights" of individuals should be protected by 
the State. That is to say, when a man suffers the kind of injury which would justify retaliation 
according to the principles of natural law, positive law should enact that the retaliation shall be 
done by the State. If you see a man making a murderous assault upon your brother, you have a 
right to kill him, if you cannot otherwise save your brother. In a state of nature— so, at least, Locke 
holds— if a man has succeeded in killing your brother, you have a right to kill him. But where law 
exists, you lose this right, which is taken over by the State. And if you kill in self-fence or in 
defence of another, you will have to prove to a law-court that this was the reason for the killing. 

We may then identify "natural law" with moral rules in so far as they are independent of positive 
legal enactments. There must be such rules if there is to be any distinction between good and bad 
laws. For Locke, the matter is simple, since moral rules have been laid down by God, and are to be 
found in the Bible. When this theological basis is removed, the matter becomes more difficult. But 
so long as it is held that there is an ethical distinction between right actions and wrong ones, we 
can say: Natural law decides what actions would be ethically right, and what wrong, in a 
community that had no government; and positive law ought to be, as far as possible, guided and 
inspired by natural law. 

In its absolute form, the doctrine that an individual has certain inalienable rights is incompatible 
with utilitarianism, i.e., with the doctrine that right acts are those that do most to promote the 
general happiness. But in order that a doctrine may be a suitable basis for law, it is not necessary 
that it should be true in every possible case, but only that it should be true in an overwhelming 
majority of cases. We can all imagine cases in which murder would be justifiable, but they are 
rare, and do not afford an argument against the illegality of murder. 


- 628 - 



Similarly it may be— I am not saying that it is— desirable, from a utilitarian point of view, to 
reserve to each individual a certain sphere of personal liberty. If so, the doctrine of the Rights of 
Man will be a suitable basis for the appropriate laws, even though these rights be subject to 
exceptions. A utilitarian will have to examine the doctrine, considered as a basis for laws, from 
the point of view of its practical effects; he cannot condemn it ab initio as contrary to his own 
ethic. 


C. THE SOCIAL CONTRACT 

In the political speculation of the seventeenth century, there were two main types of theory as to 
the origin of government. Of one type we have had an example in Sir Robert Filmer: this type 
maintained that God had bestowed power on certain persons, and that these persons, or their heirs, 
constituted the legitimate government, rebellion against which is not only treason, but impiety. 
This view was sanctioned by sentiments of immemorial antiquity: in almost all early civilizations, 
the king is a sacred person. Kings, naturally, considered it an admirable theory. Aristocracies had 
motives for supporting it and motives for opposing it. In its favour was the fact that it emphasized 
the hereditary principle, and that it gave august support to resistance against the upstart merchant 
class. Where the middle class was more feared or hated by the aristocracy than the king was, these 
motives prevailed. Where the contrary was the case, and especially where the aristocracy had a 
chance of obtaining supreme power itself, it tended to oppose the king, and therefore to reject 
theories of divine right. 

The other main type of theory— of which Locke is a representative —maintained that civil 
government is the result of a contract, and is an affair purely of this world, not something 
established by divine authority. Some writers regarded the social contract as a historical fact, 
others as a legal fiction; the important matter, for all of them, was to find a terrestrial origin for 
governmental authority. In fact, they could not think of any alternative to divine right except the 
supposed contract. It was felt by all except rebels that some reason must be found for obeying 
governments, and it was not thought sufficient to say that for most people the authority of 
government is con- 


- 629 - 



venient. Government must, in some sense, have a right to exact obedience, and the right conferred 
by a contract seemed the only alternative to a divine command. Consequently the doctrine that 
government was instituted by a contract was popular with practically all opponents of divine right 
of kings. There is a hint of this theory in Thomas Aquinas, but the first serious development of it 
is to be found in Grotius. 

The contract doctrine was capable of taking forms which justified tyranny. Hobbes, for example, 
held that there was a contract among the citizens to hand over all power to the chosen sovereign, 
but the sovereign was not a party to the contract, and therefore necessarily acquired unlimited 
authority. This theory, at first, might have justified Cromwell's totalitarian State; after the 
Restoration, it justified Charles II. In Locke's form of the doctrine, however, the government is a 
party to the contract, and can be justly resisted if it fails to fulfil its part of the bargain. Locke's 
doctrine is, in essence, more or less democratic, but the democratic element is limited by the view 
(implied rather than expressed) that those who have no property are not to be reckoned as citizens. 

Let us now see just what Locke has to say on our present topic. 

There is first a definition of political power: 

"Political power I take to be the right of making laws, with penalty of death, and consequently all 
less penalties for the regulating and preserving of property, and of employing the force of the 
community in the execution of such laws, and in the defence of the commonwealth from foreign 
injury, and all this only for the public good." 

Government, we are told, is a remedy for the inconveniences that, arise, in the state of nature, 
from the fact that, in that state, every man is the judge in his own cause. But where the monarch is 
a party to the dispute, this is no remedy, since the monarch is both judge and plaintiff. These 
considerations lead to the view that governments should not be absolute, and that the judiciary 
should be independent of the executive. Such arguments had an important future both in England 
and in America, but for the moment we are not concerned with them. 

By nature, Locke says, every man has the right to punish attacks on himself or his property, even 
by death. There is political society 


- 630 - 



there, and there only, where men have surrendered this right to the community or to the law. 

Absolute monarchy is not a form of civil government, because there is no neutral authority to 
decide disputes between the monarch and a subject; in fact the monarch, in relation to his subjects, 
is still in a state of nature. It is useless to hope that being a king will make a naturally violent man 
virtuous. 

"He that would have been insolent and injurious in the woods of America would not probably be 
much better in a throne, where perhaps learning and religion shall be found out to justify all that 
he shall do to his subjects, and the sword presently silence all those that dare question it." 

Absolute monarchy is as if men protected themselves against polecats and foxes, "but are content, 
nay think it safety, to be devoured by lions." 

Civil society involves the rule of the majority, unless it is agreed that a greater number shall be 
required. (As, for example, in the United States, for a change in the Constitution or the ratification 
of a treaty.) This sounds democratic, but it must be remembered that Locke assumes the exclusion 
of women and the poor from the rights of citizenship. 

"The beginning of politic society depends upon the consent of the individuals to join into and 
make one society." It is argued— somewhat half-heartedly— that such consent must, at some time, 
have actually taken place, though it is admitted that the origin of government antedates history 
everywhere except among the Jews. 

The civil compact which institutes government binds only those who made it; the son must 
consent afresh to a compact made by his father. (It is clear how this follows from Locke's 
principles, but it is not very realistic. A young American who, on attaining the age of twenty-one, 
announces "I refuse to be bound by the contract which inaugurated the United States" will find 
himself in difficulties.) 

The power of the government by contract, we are told, never extends beyond the common good. A 
moment ago I quoted a sentence as to the powers of government, ending "and all this only for the 
public good." It seems not to have occurred to Locke to ask who was to be the judge of the 
common good. Obviously if the government is the judge it will always decide in its own favour. 
Presumably 


- 631 - 



Locke would say that the majority of the citizens is to be the judge, But many questions have to be 
decided too quickly for it to be possible to ascertain the opinion of the electorate; of these peace 
and war are perhaps the most important. The only remedy in such cases is to allow to public 
opinion or its representatives some power— such as impeachment— of subsequently punishing 
executive officers for acts that are found to have been unpopular. But often this is a very 
inadequate remedy. 

I quoted previously a sentence which I must now quote again: 

"The great and chief end of men uniting into commonwealths, and putting themselves under 
government, is the preservation of their property." 

Consistently with this doctrine Locke declares that: 

"The supreme power cannot take from any man any part of his property without his own consent." 

Still more surprising is the statement that, although military commanders have power of life and 
death over their soldiers, they have no power of taking money. (It follows that, in any army, it 
would be wrong to punish minor breaches of discipline by fines, but pennissible to punish them 
by bodily injury, such as flogging. This shows the absurd lengths to which Locke is driven by his 
worship of property.) 

The question of taxation might be supposed to raise difficulties for Locke, but he perceives none. 
The expense of government, he says, must be borne by the citizens, but with their consent, i.e., 
with that of the majority. But why, one asks, should the consent of the majority suffice? Every 
man's consent, we were told, is necessary to justify the government in taking any part of his 
property. I suppose his tacit consent to taxation in accordance with majority decision is presumed 
to be involved in his citizenship, which, in turn, is presumed to be voluntary. All this is, of course, 
sometimes quite contrary to the facts. Most men have no effective liberty of choice as to the State 
to which they shall belong, and very few have liberty, nowadays, to belong to no State. Suppose, 
for example, you are a pacifist, and disapprove of war. Wherever you live, the government will 
take some of your property for warlike purposes. With what justice can you be compelled to 
submit to this? I can imagine many answers, but I do not think any of them are consistent with 
Locke's principles. He thrusts in the maxim of majority rule without adequate consideration, and 
offers 


- 632 - 



no transition to it from his individualistic premisses, except the mythical social contract. 

The social contract, in the sense required, is mythical even when, at some former period, there 
actually was a contract creating the government in question. The United States is a case in point. 
At the time when the Constitution was adopted, men had liberty of choice. Even then, many voted 
against it, and were therefore not parties to the contract. They could, of course, have left the 
country, and by remaining were deemed to have become bound by a contract to which they had 
not assented. But in practice it is usually difficult to leave one’s country. And in the case of men 
born after the adoption of the Constitution their consent is even more shadowy. 

The question of the rights of the individual as against the government is a very difficult one. It is 
too readily assumed by democrats that, when the government represents the majority, it has a right 
to coerce the minority. Up to a point, this must be true, since coercion is of the essence of 
government. But the divine right of majorities, if pressed too far, may become almost as tyrannical 
as the divine right of kings. Locke says little on this subject in his Essays on Government, but 
considers it at some length in his Letters on Toleration, where he argues that no believer in God 
should be penalized on account of his religious opinions. 

The theory that government was created by a contract is, of course, pre-evolutionary. Government, 
like measles and whooping-cough, must have grown up gradually, though, like them, it could be 
introduced suddenly into new regions such as the South Sea Islands. Before men had studied 
anthropology they had no idea of the psychological mechanisms involved in the beginnings of 
government, or of the fantastic reasons which lead men to adopt institutions and customs that 
subsequently prove useful. But as a legal fiction, to justify government, the theory of the social 
contract has some measure of truth. 


D. PROPERTY 

From what has been said hitherto about Locke's views on property, it might seem as though he 
were the champion of the great capitalists against both their social superiors and their social 
inferiors, but this would be only a half-truth. One finds in him, side by side and unrecon- 


- 633 - 



ciled, doctrines which foreshadow those of developed capitalism and doctrines which adumbrate a 
more nearly socialistic outlook. It is easy to misrepresent him by one-sided quotations, on this 
topic as on most others. 

I will put down, in the order in which they occur, Locke's principal dicta on the subject of 
property. 

We are told first that every man has private property in the produce of his own labour— or, at least, 
should have. In pre-industrial days this maxim was not so unrealistic as it has since become. 

Urban production was mainly by handicraftsmen who owned their tools and sold their produce. 

As for agricultural production, it was held by the school to which Locke belonged that peasant 
proprietorship would be the best system. He states that a man may own as much land as he can 
till, but not more. He seems blandly unaware that, in all the countries of Europe, the realization of 
this programme would be hardly possible without a bloody revolution. Everywhere the bulk of 
agricultural land belonged to aristocrats, who exacted from the fanners either a fixed proportion of 
the produce (often a half), or a rent which could be varied from time to time. The former system 
prevailed in France and Italy, the latter in England. Farther East, in Russia and Prussia, the 
workers were serfs, who worked for the landowner and had virtually no rights. The old system 
was ended in France by the French Revolution, in northern Italy and western Germany by the 
conquests of the French revolutionary annies. Serfdom was abolished in Prussia as a result of 
defeat by Napoleon, and in Russia as a result of defeat in the Crimean War. But in both countries 
the aristocrats retained their landed estates. In East Prussia, this system, though drastically 
controlled by the Nazis, has survived to the present day; in Russia and what are now Lithuania, 
Latvia, and Esthonia, the aristocrats were dispossessed by the Russian Revolution. In Hungary, 
Rumania, and Poland they survived; in Eastern Poland they were "liquidated" by the Soviet 
government in 1940. The Soviet government, however, has done everything in its power to 
substitute collective farming rather than peasant proprietorship throughout Russia. 

In England the development has been more complex. In Locke's day, the position of the rural 
labourer was mitigated by the existence of commons, on which he had important rights, which 
enabled him to 


- 634 - 



raise a considerable part of his food himself. This system was a survival from the Middle Ages, 
and was viewed with disapproval by modemminded men, who pointed out that from the point of 
view of production it was wasteful. Accordingly there was a movement for enclosure of 
commons, which began under Henry VIII and continued under Cromwell, but did not become 
strong until about 1750. From that time onward, for about ninety years, one common after another 
was enclosed and handed over to the local landowners. Each enclosure required an Act of 
Parliament, and the aristocrats who controlled both Houses of Parliament ruthlessly used their 
legislative power to enrich themselves, while thrusting agricultural labourers down to the verge of 
starvation. Gradually, owing to the growth of industry, the position of agricultural labourers 
improved, since otherwise they could not be prevented from migrating to the towns. At present, as 
a result of the taxation introduced by Lloyd George, the aristocrats have been compelled to part 
with most of their rural property. But those who also own urban or industrial property have been 
able to hang on to their estates. There has been no sudden revolution, but a gradual transition 
which is still in progress. At present, those aristocrats who are still rich owe their wealth to urban 
or industrial property. 

This long development may be regarded, except in Russia, as in accordance with Locke's 
principles. The odd thing is that he could announce doctrines requiring so much revolution before 
they could be put into effect, and yet show no sign that he thought the system existing in his day 
unjust, or that he was aware of its being different from the system that he advocated. 

The labour theory of value— i.e., the doctrine that the value of a product depends upon the labour 
expended upon it— which some attribute to Karl Marx and others to Ricardo, is to be found in 
Locke, and was suggested to him by a line of predecessors stretching back to Aquinas. As Tawney 
says, summarizing scholastic doctrine: 

"The essence of the argument was that payment may properly be demanded by the craftsmen who 
make the goods, or by the merchants who transport them, for both labour in their vocation and 
serve the common need. The unpardonable sin is that of the speculator or middleman, who 
snatches private gain by the exploitation of public 


- 635 - 



necessities. The true descendant of the doctrines of Aquinas is the labour theory of value. The last 
of the schoolmen was Karl Marx." 

The labour theory of value has two aspects, one ethical, the other economic. That is to say, it may 
assert that the value of a product ought to be proportional to the labour expended on it, or that in 
fact the labour regulates the price. The latter doctrine is only approximately true, as Locke 
recognizes. Nine tenths of value, he says, is due to labour; but as to the other tenth he says 
nothing. It is labour, he says, that puts the difference of value on everything. He instances land in 
America occupied by Indians, which has almost no value because the Indians do not cultivate it. 
He does not seem to realize that land may acquire value as soon as people are willing to work on 
it, and before they have actually done so. If you own a piece of desert land on which somebody 
else finds oil, you can sell it for a good price without doing any work on it. As was natural in his 
day, he does not think of such cases, but only of agriculture. Peasant proprietorship, which he 
favours, is inapplicable to such things as large-scale mining, which require expensive apparatus 
and many workers. 

The principle that a man has a right to the produce of his own labour is useless in an industrial 
civilization. Suppose you are employed in one operation in the manufacture of Ford cars, how is 
any one to estimate what proportion of the total output is due to your labour? Or suppose you are 
employed by a railway company in the transport of goods, who can decide what share you shall be 
deemed to have in the production of the goods? Such considerations have led those who wish to 
prevent the exploitation of labour to abandon the principle of the right to your own produce in 
favour of more socialistic methods of organizing production and distribution. 

The labour theory of value has usually been advocated from hostility to some class regarded as 
predatory. The Schoolmen, in so far as they held it, did so from opposition to usurers, who were 
mostly Jews. Ricardo held it in opposition to landowners, Marx to capitalists. But Locke seems to 
have held it in a vacuum, without hostility to any class. His only hostility is to monarchs, but this 
is unconnected with his views on value. 

Some of Locke's opinions are so odd that I cannot see how to make them sound sensible. He says 
that a man must not have so many plums that they are bound to go bad before he and his family 
can eat them, 


- 636 - 



but he may have as much gold and as many diamonds as he can lawfully get, because gold and 
diamonds do not go bad. It does not occur to him that the man who has the plums might sell them 
before they go bad. 

He makes a great deal of the imperishable character of the precious metals, which, he says, are the 
source of money and inequality of fortune. He seems, in an abstract and academic way, to regret 
economic inequality, but he certainly does not think that it would be wise to take such measures as 
might prevent it. No doubt he was impressed, as all the men of his time were, by the gains to 
civilization that were due to rich men, chiefly as patrons of art and letters. The same attitude exists 
in modern America, where science and art are largely dependent upon the benefactions of the very 
rich. To some extent, civilization is furthered by social injustice. This fact is the basis of what is 
most respectable in conservatism. 

E. CHECKS AND BALANCES 

The doctrine that the legislative, executive, and judicial functions of government should be kept 
separate is characteristic of liberalism; it arose in England in the course of resistance to the 
Stuarts, and is clearly formulated by Locke, at least as regards the legislature and the executive. 
The legislative and executive must be separate, he says, to prevent abuse of power. It must of 
course be understood that when he speaks of the legislature he means Parliament, and when he 
speaks of the executive he means the king; at least this is what he means emotionally, whatever he 
may logically intend to mean. Accordingly he thinks of the legislature as virtuous, while the 
executive is usually wicked. 

The legislative, he says, must be supreme, except that it must be removable by the community. It 
is implied that, like the English House of Commons, the legislative is to be elected from time to 
time by popular vote. The condition that the legislative is to be removable by the people, if taken 
seriously, condemns the part allowed by the British Constitution in Locke's day to King and Lords 
as part of the legislative power. 

In all well-framed governments, Locke says, the legislative and 


- 637 - 



executive are separate. The question therefore arises: what is to be done when they conflict? If the 
executive fails to summon the legislative at the proper times, we are told, the executive is at war 
with the people, and may be removed by force. This is obviously a view suggested by what 
happened under Charles I. From 1628 to 1640 he tried to govern without Parliament; this sort of 
thing, Locke feels, must be prevented, by civil war if necessary. 

"Force," he says, "is to be opposed to nothing but unjust and unlawful force." This principle is 
useless in practice unless there exists some body with the legal right to pronounce when force is 
"unjust and unlawful." Charles I's attempt to collect ship-money without the consent of Parliament 
was declared by his opponents to be "unjust and unlawful," and by him to be just and lawful. Only 
the military issue of the Civil War proved that his interpretation of the Constitution was the wrong 
one. The same thing happened in the American Civil War. Had States the right to secede? No one 
knew, and only the victory of the North decided the legal question. The belief-which one finds in 
Locke and in most writers of his time— that any honest man can know what is just and lawful, is 
one that does not allow for the strength of party bias on both sides, or for the difficulty of 
establishing a tribunal, whether outwardly or in men’s consciences, that shall be capable of 
pronouncing authoritatively on vexed questions. In practice, such questions, if sufficiently 
important, are decided simply by power, not by justice and law. 

To some degree, though in veiled language, Locke recognizes this fact. In a dispute between 
legislative and executive, he says, there is, in certain cases, no judge under Heaven. Since Heaven 
does not make explicit pronouncements, this means, in effect, that a decision can only be reached 
by fighting, since it is assumed that Heaven will give the victory to the better cause. Some such 
view is essential to any doctrine that divides governmental power. Where such a doctrine is 
embodied in the Constitution, the only way to avoid occasional civil war is to practise 
compromise and common sense. But compromise and common sense are habits of mind, and 
cannot be embodied in a written constitution. 

It is surprising that Locke says nothing about the judiciary, although this was a burning question in 
his day. Until the Revolution, judges could at any moment be dismissed by the king; consequently 


- 638 - 



they condemned his enemies and acquitted his friends. After the Revolution, they were made 
irremovable except by an Address from both Houses of Parliament. It was thought that this would 
cause their decisions to be guided by the law; in fact, in cases involving party spirit, it has merely 
substituted the judge's prejudice for the king's. However that may be, wherever the principle of 
checks and balances prevailed the judiciary became a third independent branch of government 
alongside of the legislative and executive. The most noteworthy example is the United States' 
Supreme Court. 

The history of the doctrine of checks and balances has been interesting. 

In England, the country of its origin, it was intended to limit the power of the king, who, until the 
Revolution, had complete control of the executive. Gradually, however, the executive became 
dependent upon Parliament, since it was impossible for a ministry to carry on without a majority 
in the House of Commons. The executive thus became, in effect, a committee chosen in fact, 
though not in form, by Parliament, with the result that legislative and executive powers became 
gradually less and less separate. During the last fifty years or so, a further development took place, 
owing to the Prime Minister’s power of dissolution and to the increasing strictness of party 
discipline. The majority in Parliament now decides which party shall be in power, but, having 
decided that, it cannot in practice decided anything else. Proposed legislation is hardly ever 
enacted unless introduced by government. Thus the government is both legislative and executive, 
and its power is only limited by the need of occasional general elections. This system is, of course, 
totally contrary to Locke's principles. 

In France, where the doctrine was preached with great force by Montesquieu, it was held by the 
more moderate parties in the French Revolution, but was swept into temporary oblivion by the 
victory of the Jacobins. Napoleon naturally had no use for it, but it was revived at the Restoration, 
to disappear again with the rise of Napoleon III. It was again revived in 1871, and led to the 
adoption of a constitution in which the President had very little power and the government could 
not dissolve the Chambers. The result was to give great power to the Chamber of Deputies, both 
as against the government and as against the electorate. There was more division of powers than 
in 


- 639 - 



modem England, but less than there should be on Locke's principles, since the legislature 
overshadowed the executive. What the French Constitution will be after the present war it is 
impossible to foresee. 

The country where Locke's principle of the division of powers has found its fullest application is 
the United States, where the President and Congress are wholly independent of each other, and the 
Supreme Court is independent of both. Inadvertently, the Constitution made the Supreme Court a 
branch of the legislature, since nothing is a law if the Supreme Court says it is not. The fact that 
its powers are nominally only interpretative in reality increases those powers, since it makes it 
difficult to criticize what are supposed to be purely legal decisions. It says a very great deal for the 
political sagacity of Americans that this Constitution has only once led to armed conflict. 

Locke's political philosophy was, on the whole, adequate and useful until the industrial revolution. 
Since then, it has been increasingly unable to tackle the important problems. The power of 
property, as embodied in vast corporations, grew beyond anything imagined by Locke. The 
necessary functions of the State— for example, in education— increased enormously. Nationalism 
brought about an alliance, sometimes an amalgamation, of economic and political power, making 
war the principal means of competition. The single separate citizen has no longer the power and 
independence that he had in Locke's speculations. Our age is one of organization, and its conflicts 
are between organizations, not between separate individuals. The state of nature, as Locke says, 
still exists as between States. A new international Social Contract is necessary before we can 
enjoy the promised benefits of government. When once an international government has been 
created, much of Locke's political philosophy will again become applicable, though not the part of 
it that deals with private property. 


- 640 - 

CHAPTER XV Locke's Influence 

FROM the time of Locke down to the present day, there have been in Europe two main types of 
philosophy, and one of these owes both its doctrines and its method to Locke, while the other was 
derived first from Descartes and then from Kant. Kant himself thought that he had made a 
synthesis of the philosophy derived from Descartes and that derived from Locke; but this cannot 
be admitted, at least from a historical point of view, for the followers of Kant were in the 
Cartesian, not the Lockean, tradition. The heirs of Locke are, first Berkeley and Hume; second, 
those of the French philosophes who did not belong to the school of Rousseau; third, Bentham 
and the philosophical Radicals; fourth, with important accretions from Continental philosophy, 
Marx and his disciples. But Marx's system is eclectic, and any simple statement about it is almost 
sure to be false; I will, therefore, leave him on one side until I come to consider him in detail. 

In Locke's own day, his chief philosophical opponents were the Cartesians and Leibniz. Quite 
illogically, the victory of Locke's philosophy in England and France was largely due to the 
prestige of Newton. Descartes' authority as a philosopher was enhanced, in his own day, by his 
work in mathematics and natural philosophy. But his doctrine of vortices was definitely inferior to 
Newton's law of gravitation as an explanation of the solar system. The victory of the Newtonian 
cosmogony diminished men’s respect for Descartes and increased their respect for England. Both 
these causes inclined men favourably towards Locke. In eighteenth-century France, where the 
intellectuals were in rebellion against an antiquated, corrupt, and effete despotism, they regarded 
England as the home of freedom, and were predisposed in favour of Locke's philosophy by his 
political doctrines. In the last times before the Revolution. Locke's influence 


- 641 - 



in France was reinforced by that of Flume, who lived for a time in France and was personally 
acquainted with many of the leading savants. 

The chief transmitter of English influence to France was Voltaire. 

In England, the philosophical followers of Locke, until the French Revolution, took no interest 
in his political doctrines. Berkeley was a bishop not much interested in politics; Hume was a 
Tory who followed the lead of Bolingbroke. England was politically quiescent in their time, and 
a philosopher could be content to theorize without troubling himself about the state of the 
world. The French Revolution changed this, and forced the best minds into opposition to the 
status quo. Nevertheless, the tradition in pure philosophy remained unbroken. Shelley Necessity 
of Atheism, for which he was expelled from Oxford, is full of Locke's influence, f 

Until the publication of Kant Critique of Pure Reason in 1781, it might have seemed as if the 
older philosophical tradition of Descartes, Spinoza, and Leibniz were being definitely overcome 
by the newer empirical method. This newer method, however, had never prevailed in German 
universities, and after 1792 it was held responsible for the horrors of the Revolution. Recanting 
revolutionaries such as Coleridge found in Kant an intellectual support for their opposition to 
French atheism. The Germans, in their resistance to the French, were glad to have a German 
philosophy to uphold them. Even the French, after the fall of Napoleon, were glad of any 
weapon against Jacobinism. All these factors favoured Kant. 

Kant, like Darwin, gave rise to a movement which he would have detested. Kant was a liberal, a 
democrat, a pacifist, but those who professed to develop his philosophy were none of these 
things. Or, if they still called themselves Liberals, they were Liberals of a new species. Since 
Rousseau and Kant, there have been two schools of liberalism, which may be distinguished as 
the hard-headed and the soft-hearted. The hard-headed developed, through Bentham, Ricardo, 
and Marx, by logical stages into Stalin; the soft-hearted, by other logical stages, through Fichte, 
Byron, Carlyle, and Nietzsche, into Hitler. This statement, of course, is too schematic to be 
quite true, 


* Take, e.g., Shelley's dictum: "When a proposition is offered to the mind, it perceives the 
agreement or disagreement of the ideas of which it is composed." 


- 642 - 


but it may serve as a map and a mnemonic. The stages in the evolution of ideas have had almost 
the quality of the Hegelian dialectic: doctrines have developed, by steps that each seem natural, 
into their opposites. But the developments have not been due solely to the inherent movement of 
ideas; they have been governed, throughout, by external circumstances and the reflection of these 
circumstances in human emotions. That this is the case may be made evident by one outstanding 
fact: that the ideas of liberalism have undergone no part of this development in America, where 
they remain to this day as in Locke. 

Leaving politics on one side, let us examine the differences between the two schools of 
philosophy, which may be broadly distinguished as the Continental and the British respectively. 

There is first of all a difference of method. British philosophy is more detailed and piecemeal than 
that of the Continent; when it allows itself some general principle, it sets to work to prove it 
inductively by examining its various applications. Thus Hume, after announcing that there is no 
idea without an antecedent impression, immediately proceeds to consider the following objection: 
suppose you are seeing two shades of colour which are similar but not identical, and suppose you 
have never seen a shade of colour intennediate between the two, can you nevertheless imagine 
such a shade? He does not decide the question, and considers that a decision adverse to his general 
principle would not be fatal to him, because his principle is not logical but empirical. When— to 
take a contrast— Leibniz wants to establish his monadology, he argues, roughly, as follows: 
Whatever is complex must be composed of simple parts; what is simple cannot be extended; 
therefore everything is composed of parts having no extension. But what is not extended is not 
matter. Therefore the ultimate constituents of things are not material, and, if not material, then 
mental. Consequently a table is really a colony of souls. 

The difference of method, here, may be characterized as follows: In Locke or Hume, a 
comparatively modest conclusion is drawn from a broad survey of many facts, whereas in Leibniz 
a vast edifice of deduction is pyramided upon a pin-point of logical principle. In Leibniz, if the 
principle is completely true and the deductions are entirely valid, all is well; but the structure is 
unstable, and the slightest flaw anywhere brings it down in ruins. In Locke or Hume, on the 


- 643 - 



contrary, the base of the pyramid is on the solid ground of observed fact, and the pyramid tapers 
upward, not downward; consequently the equilibrium is stable, and a flaw here or there can be 
rectified without total disaster. This difference of method survived Kant's attempt to incorporate 
something of the empirical philosophy: from Descartes to Hegel on the one side, and from Locke 
to John Stuart Mill on the other, it remains unvarying. 

The difference in method is connected with various other differences. Let us take first 
metaphysics. 

Descartes offered metaphysical proofs of the existence of God, of which the most important had 
been invented in the eleventh century by Saint Anselm, archbishop of Canterbury. Spinoza had a 
pantheistic God, who seemed to the orthodox to be no God at all; however that may be, Spinoza's 
arguments were essentially metaphysical, and are traceable (though he may not have realized this) 
to the doctrine that every proposition must have a subject and a predicate. Leibniz's metaphysics 
had the same source. 

In Locke, the philosophical direction that he inaugurated is not yet fully developed; he accepts as 
valid Descartes' arguments as to the existence of God. Berkeley invented a wholly new argument; 
but Hume— in whom the new philosophy comes to completion— rejected metaphysics entirely, and 
held that nothing can be discovered by reasoning on the subjects with which metaphysics is 
concerned. This view persisted in the empirical school, while the opposite view, somewhat 
modified, persisted in Kant and his disciples. 

In ethics, there is a similar division between the two schools. 

Locke, as we saw, believed pleasure to be the good, and this was the prevalent view among 
empiricists throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Their opponents, on the contrary, 
despised pleasure as ignoble, and had various systems of ethics which seemed more exalted. 
Hobbes valued power, and Spinoza, up to a point, agreed with Hobbes. There are in Spinoza two 
unreconciled views on ethics, one that of Hobbes, the other that the good consists in mystic union 
with God. Leibniz made no important contribution to ethics, but Kant made ethics supreme, and 
derived his metaphysics from ethical premisses. Kant's ethic is important, because it is anti- 
utilitarian, a priori, and what is called "noble." 


- 644 - 



Kant says that if you are kind to your brother because you are fond of him, you have no moral 
merit: an act only has moral merit when it is perfonned because the moral law enjoins it. 

Although pleasure is not the good, it is nevertheless unjust— so Kant maintains-that the virtuous 
should suffer. Since this often happens in this world, there must be another world where they are 
rewarded after death, and there must be a God to secure justice in the life hereafter. He rejects all 
the old metaphysical arguments for God and immortality, but considers his new ethical argument 
irrefutable. 

Kant himself was a man whose outlook on practical affairs was kindly and humanitarian, but the 
same cannot be said of most of those who rejected happiness as the good. The sort of ethic that is 
called "noble" is less associated with attempts to improve the world than is the more mundane 
view that we should seek to make men happier. This is not surprising. Contempt for happiness is 
easier when the happiness is other people's than when it is our own. Usually the substitute for 
happiness is some form of heroism. This affords unconscious outlets for the impulse to power, 
and abundant excuses for cruelty. Or, again, what is valued may be strong emotion; this was the 
case with the romantics. This led to a toleration of such passions as hatred and revenge; Byron's 
heroes are typical, and are never persons of exemplary behaviour. The men who did most to 
promote human happiness were— as might have been expected— those who thought happiness 
important, not those who despised it in comparison with something more "sublime." Moreover, a 
man's ethic usually reflects his character, and benevolence leads to a desire for the general 
happiness. Thus the men who thought happiness the end of life tended to be the more benevolent, 
while those who proposed other ends were often dominated, unconsciously, by cruelty or love of 
power. 

These ethical differences are associated, usually though not invariably, with differences in politics. 
Locke, as we saw, is tentative in his beliefs, not at all authoritarian, and willing to leave every 
question to be decided by free discussion. The result, both in his case and in that of his followers, 
was a belief in refonn, but of a gradual sort. Since their systems of thought were piecemeal, and 
the result of separate investigations of many different questions, their political views tended 
naturally to have the same character. They fought 


- 645 - 



shy of large programmes all cut out of one block, and preferred to consider each question on its 
merits. In politics as in philosophy, they were tentative and experimental. Their opponents, on the 
other hand, who thought they could "grasp this sorry scheme of things entire," were much more 
willing to "shatter it to bits and then remould it nearer to the heart's desire." They might do this as 
revolutionaries, or as men who wished to increase the authority of the powers that be; in either 
case, they did not shrink from violence in pursuit of vast objectives, and they condemned love of 
peace as ignoble. 

The great political defect of Locke and his disciples, from a modern point of view, was their 
worship of property. But those who criticized them on this account often did so in the interest of 
classes that were more harmful than the capitalists, such as monarchs, aristocrats, and militarists. 
The aristocratic landowner, whose income comes to him without effort and in accordance with 
immemorial custom, does not think of himself as a money-grubber, and is not so thought of by 
men who do not look below the picturesque surface. The business man, on the contrary, is 
engaged in the conscious pursuit of wealth, and while his activities were more or less novel they 
roused a resentment not felt towards the gentlemanly exactions of the landowner. That is to say, 
this was the case with middle-class writers and those who read them; it was not the case with the 
peasants, as appeared in the French and Russian Revolutions. But peasants are inarticulate. 

Most of the opponents of Locke's school had an admiration for war, as being heroic and involving 
a contempt for comfort and ease. Those who adopted a utilitarian ethic, on the contrary, tended to 
regard most wars as folly. This, again, at least in the nineteenth century, brought them into 
alliance with the capitalists, who disliked wars because they interfered with trade. The capitalists' 
motive was, of course, pure self-interest, but it led to views more consonant with the general 
interest than those of militarists and their literary supporters. The attitude of capitalists to war, it is 
true, has fluctuated. England's wars of the eighteenth century, except the American war, were on 
the whole profitable, and were supported by business men; but throughout the nineteenth century, 
until its last years, they favoured peace. In modern times, big business, everywhere, has come into 
such intimate relations with the national State that the 


- 646 - 



situation is greatly changed. But even now, both in England and in America, big business on the 
whole dislikes war. 


Enlightened self-interest is, of course, not the loftiest of motives, but those who decry it often 
substitute, by accident or design, motives which are much worse, such as hatred, envy, and love of 
power. On the whole, the school which owed its origin to Locke, and which preached enlightened 
self-interest, did more to increase human happiness, and less to increase human misery, than was 
done by the schools which despised it in the name of heroism and self-sacrifice. I do not forget the 
horrors of early industrialism, but these, after all, were mitigated within the system. And I set 
against them Russian serfdom, the evils of war and its aftennath of fear and hatred, and the 
inevitable obscurantism of those who attempt to preserve ancient systems when they have lost 
their vitality. 


CHAPTER XVI Berkeley 

GORGE BERKELEY ( 1685-1753) is important in philosophy through his denial of the existence 
of matter— a denial which he supported by a number of ingenious arguments. He maintained that 
material objects only exist through being perceived. To the objection that, in that case, a tree, for 
instance, would cease to exist if no one was looking at it, he replied that God always perceives 
everything; if there were no God, what we take to be material objects would have a jerky life, 
suddenly leaping into being when we look at them; but as it is, owing to God's perceptions, trees 
and rocks and stones have an existence as continuous as common sense supposes. This is, in his 
opinion, a weighty argument for the existence of God. A limerick by Ronald Knox, with a reply, 
sets forth Berkeley's theory of material objects: 

- 647 - 



There was a young man who said, "God Must think it exceedingly odd If he finds that this tree 
Continues to be When there's no one about in the Quad." 


REPLY 


Dear Sir: 

Your astonishment's odd: / am always about in the Quad. 

And that's why the tree Will continue to be, Since observed by Yours faithfully, 

GOD. 

Berkeley was an Irishman, and became a Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, at the age of twenty- 
two. He was presented at court by Swift, and Swift's Vanessa left him half her property. He 
formed a scheme for a college in the Bermudas, with a view to which he went to America; but 
after spending three years ( 1728-3 1) in Rhode Island, he came home and relinquished the project. 
He was the author of the well-known line: 

Westward the course of empire takes its way, on account of which the town of Berkeley in 
California was called after him. In 1734 he became Bishop of Cloyne. In later life he abandoned 
philosophy for tar-water, to which he attributed marvellous medicinal properties. It was tar-water 
that he described as providing the cups that cheer, but do not inebriate— a sentiment more familiar 
as subsequently applied by Cowper to tea. 

All his best work was done while he was still quite young: A New Theoiy of Vision in 1709, The 
Principles of Human Knowledge in. 1710, The Dialogues of Hylas and Philonous in 1713. 
His.writings after the age of twenty-eight were of less importance. He is a very attractive writer, 
with a charming style. 

His argument against matter is most persuasively set forth in The Dialogues of Hylas and 
Philonous. Of these dialogues I propose to consider only the first and the very beginning of the 
second, since everything that is said after that seems to me of minor importance. In the portion of 
the work that I shall consider, Berkeley advances valid 


- 648 - 



arguments in favour of a certain important conclusion, though not quite in favour of the 
conclusion that he thinks he is proving. He thinks he is proving that all reality is mental; what he 
is proving is that we perceive qualities, not things, and that qualities are relative to the percipient. 

I shall begin with an uncritical account of what seems to me important in the Dialogues; I shall 
then embark upon criticism; and finally I shall state the problems concerned as they appear to me. 

The characters in the Dialogues are two: Hylas, who stands for scientifically educated common 
sense; and Philonous, who is Berkeley. 

After a few amiable remarks, Hylas says that he has heard strange reports of the opinions of 
Philonous, to the effect that he does not believe in material substance. "Can anything," he 
exclaims, "be more fantastical, more repugnant to Common Sense, or a more manifest piece of 
Scepticism, than to believe there is no such thing as matter ?" Philonous replies that he does not 
deny the reality of sensible things, i.e., of what is perceived immediately by the senses, but that we 
do not see the causes of colours or hear the causes of sounds. Both agree that the senses make no 
inferences. Philonous points out that by sight we perceive only light, colour, and figure; by 
hearing, only sounds; and so on. Consequently, apart from sensible qualities there is nothing 
sensible, and sensible things are nothing but sensible qualities or combinations of sensible 
qualities. 

Philonous now sets to work to prove that "the reality of sensible things consists in being 
perceived," as against the opinion of Hylas, that "to exist is one thing, and to be perceived is 
another." That sensedata are mental is a thesis which Philonous supports by a detailed 
examination of the various senses. He begins with heat and cold. Great heat, he says, is a pain, and 
pain must be in a mind. Therefore heat is mental; and a similar argument applies to cold. This is 
reinforced by the famous argument about the lukewarm water. When one of your hands is hot and 
the other cold, you put both into lukewarm water, which feels cold to one hand and hot to the 
other; but the water cannot be at once hot and cold. This finishes Hylas, who acknowledges that 
"heat and cold are only sensations existing in our minds." But he points out hopefully that other 
sensible qualities remain. 

Philonous next takes up tastes. He points out that a sweet taste is 


- 649 - 



a pleasure and a bitter taste is a pain, and that pleasure and pain are mental. The same argument 
applies to odours, since they are pleasant or unpleasant. 

Hylas makes a vigorous effort to rescue sound, which, he says, is motion in air, as may be seen 
from the fact that there are no sounds in a vacuum. We must, he says, "distinguish between sound 
as it is perceived by us, and as it is in itself; or between the sound which we immediately perceive 
and that which exists without us." Philonous points out that what Hylas calls "real" sound, being a 
movement, might possibly be seen or felt, but can certainly not be heard; therefore it is not sound 
as we know it in perception. As to this, Hylas now concedes that "sounds too have no real being 
without the mind." 

They now come to colours, and here Hylas begins confidently: "Pardon me: the case of colours is 
very different. Can anything be plainer than that we see them on the objects?" Substances existing 
without the mind, he maintains, have the colours we see on them. But Philonous has no difficulty 
in disposing of this view. He begins with the sunset clouds, which are red and golden, and points 
out that a cloud, when you are close to it, has no such colours. He goes on to the difference made 
by a microscope, and to the yellowness of everything to a man who has jaundice. And very small 
insects, he says, must be able to see much smaller objects than we can see. Hylas thereupon says 
that colour is not in the objects, but in the light; it is, he says, a thin fluid substance. Philonous 
points out, as in the case of sound, that, according to Hylas, "real" colours are something different 
from the red and blue that we see, and that this won’t do. 

Hereupon Hylas gives way about all secondary qualities, but continues to say that primary 
qualities, notably figure and motion, are inherent in external unthinking substances. To this 
Philonous replies that things look big when we are near them and small when we are far off, and 
that a movement may seem quick to one man and slow to another. 

At this point Hylas attempts a new departure. He made a mistake, he says, in not distinguishing 
the object from the sensation', the act of perceiving he admits to be mental, but not what is 
perceived; colours, for example, "have a real existence without the mind, in some unthinking 
substance." To this Philonous replies: "That any immediate object of the senses— that is, any idea 
or combination of ideas— should exist in an unthinking substance, or exterior to all minds, is in 
itself an evi- 


- 650 - 



dent contradiction." It will be observed that, at this point, the argument becomes logical and is no 
longer empirical. A few pages later, Philonous says: "Whatever is immediately perceived is an 
idea; and can any idea exist out of the mind?" 

After a metaphysical discussion of substance, Hylas returns to the discussion of visual sensations, 
with the argument that he sees things at a distance. To this Philonous replies that this is equally 
true of things seen in dreams, which every one admits to be mental; further, that distance is not 
perceived by sight, but judged as the result of experience, and that, to a man born blind but now 
for the first time able to see, visual objects would not appear distant. 

At the beginning of the second Dialogue, Hylas urges that certain traces in the brain are the causes 
of sensations, but Philonous retorts that "the brain, being a sensible thing, exists only in the mind." 

The remainder of the Dialogues is less interesting, and need not be considered. 

Let us now make a critical analysis of Berkeley's contentions. 

Berkeley's argument consists of two parts. On the one hand, he argues that we do not perceive 
material things, but only colours, sounds, etc., and that these are "mental" or "in the mind." His 
reasoning is completely cogent as to the first point, but as to the second it suffers from the absence 
of any definition of the word "mental." He relics, in fact, upon the received view that everything 
must be either material or mental, and that nothing is both. 

When he says that we perceive qualities, not "things" or "material substances," and that there is no 
reason to suppose that the different qualities which common sense regards as all belonging to one 
"thing" inhere in a substance distinct from each and all of them, his reasoning may be accepted. 
But when he goes on to say that sensible qualities-including primary qualities— are "mental," the 
arguments are of very different kinds, and of very different degrees of validity. There are some 
attempting to prove logical necessity, while others are more empirical. Let us take the former first. 

Philonous says: "Whatever is immediately perceived is an idea: and can any idea exist out of the 
mind?" This would require a long discussion of the word "idea." If it were held that thought and 
perception consist of a relation between subject and object, it would be possible to identify the 
mind with the subject, and to maintain that there is nothing "in" the mind, but only objects 
"before" it. Berkeley 


- 651 - 



discusses the view that we must distinguish the act of perceiving from the object perceived, and 
that the former is mental while the latter is not. His argument against this view is obscure, and 
necessarily so, since, for one who believes in mental substance, as Berkeley does, there is no valid 
means of refuting it. He says: "That any immediate object of the senses should exist in an 
unthinking substance, or exterior to all minds, is in itself an evident contradiction." There is here a 
fallacy, analogous to the following: "It is impossible for a nephew to exist without an uncle; now 
Mr. A is a nephew; therefore it is logically necessary for Mr. A to have an uncle." It is, of course, 
logically necessary given that Mr. A is a nephew, but not from anything to be discovered by 
analysis of Mr. A. So, if something is an object of the senses, some mind is concerned with it; but 
it does not follow that the same thing could not have existed without being an object of the senses. 

There is a somewhat analogous fallacy as regards what is conceived. Hylas maintains that he can 
conceive a house which no one perceives, and which is not in any mind. Philonous retorts that 
whatever Hylas conceives is in his mind, so that the supposed house is, after all, mental. Hylas 
should have answered: "I do not mean that I have in mind the image of a house; when I say that I 
can conceive a house which no one perceives, what I really mean is that I can understand the 
proposition ’there is a house which no one perceives,' or, better still, 'there is a house which no one 
either perceives or conceives.'" This proposition is composed entirely of intelligible words, and 
the words are correctly put together. Whether the proposition is true or false, I do not know; but I 
am sure that it cannot be shown to be selfcontradictory. Some closely similar propositions can be 
proved. For instance: the number of possible multiplications of two integers is infinite, therefore 
there are some that have never been thought of. Berkeley's argument, if valid, would prove that 
this is impossible. 

The fallacy involved is a very common one. We can, by means of concepts drawn from 
experience, construct statements about classes some or all of whose members are not experienced. 
Take some perfectly ordinary concept, say "pebble"; this is an empirical concept derived from 
perception. But it does not follow that all pebbles are perceived, unless we include the fact of 
being perceived in our definition of "pebble." Unless we do this, the concept "unperceived pebble" 


- 652 - 



is logically unobjectionable, in spite of the fact that it is logically impossible to perceive an 
instance of it. 

Schematically, the argument is as follows. Berkeley says: "Sensible objects must be sensible. A 
is a sensible object. Therefore A must be sensible." But if "must" indicates logical necessity, the 
argument is only valid if A must be a sensible object. The argument does not prove that, from 
the properties of A other than its being sensible, it can be deduced that A is sensible. It does not 
prove, for example, that colours intrinsically indistinguishable from those that we see may not 
exist unseen. We may believe on physiological grounds that this does not occur, but such 
grounds are empirical; so far as logic is concerned, there is no reason why there should not be 
colours where there is no eye or brain. 

I come now to Berkeley's empirical arguments. To begin with, it is a sign of weakness to 
combine empirical and logical arguments, for the latter, if valid, make the fonner superfluous. * 
If I am contending that a square cannot be round, I shall not appeal to the fact that no Square in 
any known city is round. But as we have rejected the logical arguments, it becomes necessary to 
consider the empirical arguments on their merits. 

The first of the empirical arguments is an odd one: That heat cannot be in the object, because 
"the most vehement and intense degree of heat [is] a very great pain" and we cannot suppose 
"any unperceiving thing capable of pain or pleasure." There is an ambiguity in the word "pain," 
of which Berkeley takes advantage. It may mean the painful quality of a sensation, or it may 
mean the sensation that has this quality. We say a broken leg is painful, without implying that 
the leg is in the mind; it might be, similarly, that heat causes pain, and that this is all we ought 
to mean when we say it is a pain. This argument, therefore, is a poor one. 

The argument about the hot and cold hands in lukewarm water, strictly speaking, would only 
prove that what we perceive in that experiment is not hot and cold, but hotter and colder. There 
is nothing to prove that these are subjective. 

In regard to tastes, the argument from pleasure and pain is repeated: Sweetness is a pleasure and 
bitterness a pain, therefore both are mental. 


* E.g., "I was not drunk last night. I had only had two glasses; besides, it is well kn own that I 
am a teetotaller." 


- 653 - 


It is also urged that a thing that tastes sweet when I am well may taste bitter when I am ill. Very 
similar arguments are used about odours: since they are pleasant or unpleasant, "they cannot exist 
in any but a perceiving substance or mind." Berkeley assumes, here and everywhere, that what 
does not inhere in matter must inhere in a mental substance, and that nothing can be both mental 
and material. 

The argument in regard to sound is ad hominem. Hylas says that sounds are "really" motions in the 
air, and Philonous retorts that motions can be seen or felt, not heard, so that "real" sounds are 
unaudible. This is hardly a fair argument, since percepts of motion, according to Berkeley, are just 
as subjective as other percepts. The motions that Hylas requires will have to be unperceived and 
imperceptible. Nevertheless it is valid in so far as it points out that sound, as heard, cannot be 
identified with the motions of air that physics regards as its cause. 

Hylas, after abandoning secondary qualities, is not yet ready to abandon primary qualities, viz. 
Extension, Figure, Solidity, Gravity, Motion, and Rest. The argument, naturally, concentrates on 
extension and motion. If things have real sizes, says Philonous, the same thing cannot be of 
different sizes at the same time, and yet it looks larger when we are near it than when we are far 
off. And if motion is really in the object, how comes it that the same motion may seem fast to one 
and slow to another? Such arguments must, I think, be allowed to prove the subjectivity of 
perceived space. But this subjectivity is physical: it is equally true of a camera, and therefore does 
not prove that shape is "mental." In the second Dialogue Philonous sums up the discussion, so far 
as it has gone, in the words: "Besides spirits, all that we know or conceive are our own ideas." He 
ought not, of course, to make an exception for spirits, since it is just as impossible to know spirit 
as to know matter. The arguments, in fact, are almost identical in both cases. 

Let us now try to state what positive conclusions we can reach as a result of the kind of argument 
inaugurated by Berkeley. 

Things as we know them are bundles of sensible qualities: a table, for example, consists of its 
visual shape, its hardness, the noise it emits when rapped, and its smell (if any). These different 
qualities have certain contiguities in experience, which lead common sense to regard them as 
belonging to one "thing," but the concept of "thing" or "substance" adds nothing to the perceived 
qualities, and is unnecessary. So far we are on firm ground. 


- 654 - 



But we must now ask ourselves what we mean by "perceiving." Philonous maintains that, as 
regards sensible things, their reality consists in their being perceived; but he does not tell us what 
he means by perception. There is a theory, which he rejects, that perception is a relation between a 
subject and a percept. Since he believed the ego to be a substance, he might well have adopted this 
theory; however, he decided against it. For those who reject the notion of a substantial ego, this 
theory is impossible. What, then, is meant by calling something a "percept"? Does it mean 
anything more than that the something in question occurs? Can we turn Berkeley's dictum round, 
and instead of saying that reality consists in being perceived, say that being perceived consists in 
being real? However this may be, Berkeley holds it logically possible that there should be 
unperceived things, since he holds that some real things, viz., spiritual substances, are 
unperceived. And it seems obvious that, when we say that an event is perceived, we mean 
something more than that it occurs. 

What is this more? One obvious difference between perceived and unperceived events is that the 
former, but not the latter, can be remembered. Is there any other difference? 

Recollection is one of a whole genus of effects which are more or less peculiar to the phenomena 
that we naturally call "mental." These effects are connected with habit. A burnt child fears the fire; 
a burnt poker does not. The physiologist, however, deals with habit and kindred matters as a 
characteristic of nervous tissue, and has no need to depart from a physicalist interpretation. In 
physicalist language, we can say that an occurrence is "perceived" if it has effects of certain kinds; 
in this sense we might almost say that a watercourse "perceives" the rain by which it is deepened, 
and that a river valley is a "memory" of former downpours. Habit and memory, when described in 
physicalist terms, are not wholly absent in dead matter; the difference, in this respect, between 
living and dead matter, is only one of degree. 

In this view, to say that an event is "perceived" is to say that it has effects of certain kinds, and 
there is no reason, either logical or empirical, for supposing that all events have effects of these 
kinds. 

Theory of knowledge suggests a different standpoint. We start, here, not from finished science, 
but from whatever knowledge is the ground for our belief in science. This is what Berkeley is 
doing. Here it is not necessary, in advance, to define a "percept." The method, in outline, is as 
follows. We collect the propositions that we feel we 

- 655 - 

know without inference, and we find that most of these have to do with dated particular events. 
These events we define as "percepts." Percepts, therefore, are those events that we know 
without inference; or at least, to allow for memory, such events were at some time percepts. We 
are then faced with the question: Can we, from our own percepts, infer any other events? Here 
four positions are possible, of which the first three are forms of idealism. 

1 . ( 1) We may deny totally the validity of all inferences from my present percepts and 

memories to other events. This view must be taken by any one who confines inference to 
deduction. Any event, and any group of events, is logically capable of standing alone, 
and therefore no group of events affords demonstrative proof of the existence of other 
events. If, therefore, we confine inference to deduction, the known world is confined to 
those events in our own biography that we perceive— or have perceived, if memory is 
admitted. 



2. (2) The second position, which is solipsism as ordinarily understood, allows some 
inference from my percepts, but only to other events in my own biography. Take, for 
example, the view that, at any moment in waking life, there are sensible objects that we 
do not notice. We see many things without saying to ourselves that we see them; at least, 
so it seems. Keeping the eyes fixed in an environment in which we perceive no 
movement, we can notice various things in succession, and we feel persuaded that they 
were visible before we noticed them; but before we noticed them they were not data for 
theory of knowledge. This degree of inference from what we observe is made 
unreflectingly by everybody, even by those who most wish to avoid an undue extension 
of our knowledge beyond experience. 

3. (3) The third position— which seems to be held, for instance, by Eddington— is that it is 
possible to make inferences to other events analogous to those in our own experience, 
and that, therefore, we have a right to believe that there are, for instance, colours seen by 
other people but not by ourselves, toothaches felt by other people, Pleasures enjoyed and 
pains endured by other people, and so on, but that we have no right to infer events 
experienced by no one and not forming part of any "mind." This view may be defended 
on the ground that all inference to events which lie outside my observation is by analogy, 
and that events which no one experiences are not 

-656- 

sufficiently analogous to my data to warrant analogical inferences. 

5. (4) The fourth position is that of common sense and traditional physics, according to 

which there are, in addition to my own experiences and other people's, also events which 
no one experiences— for example, the furniture of my bedroom when I am asleep and it is 
pitch dark. G. E. Moore once accused idealists of holding that trains only have wheels 
while they are in stations, on the ground that passengers cannot see the wheels while they 
remain in the train. Common sense refuses to believe that the wheels suddenly spring 
into being whenever you look, but do not bother to exist when no one is inspecting them. 
When this point of view is scientific, it bases the inference to unperceived events on 
causal laws. 



I do not propose, at present, to decide between these four points of view. The decision, if 
possible at all, can only be made by an elaborate investigation of non-demonstrative inference 
and the theory of probability. What I do propose to do is to point out certain logical errors 
which have been committed by those who have discussed these questions. 

Berkeley, as we have seen, thinks that there are logical reasons proving that only minds and 
mental events can exist. This view, on other grounds, is also held by Hegel and his followers. I 
believe this to be a complete mistake. Such a statement as "there was a time before life existed 
on this planet," whether true or false, cannot be condemned on grounds of logic, any more than 
"there are multiplication sums which no one will have ever worked out." To be observed, or to 
be a percept, is merely to have effects of certain kinds, and there is no logical reason why all 
events should have effects of these kinds. 

There is, however, another kind of argument, which, while it does not establish idealism as a 
metaphysic, does, if valid, establish it as a practical policy. It is said that a proposition which is 
unverifiable has no meaning; that verification depends upon percepts; and that, therefore, a 
proposition about anything except actual or possible percepts is meaningless. I think that this 
view, strictly interpreted, would confine us to the first of the above four theories, and would 
forbid us to speak about anything that we have not ourselves explicitly noticed. If so, it is a 
view that no one can hold in practice, which is a defect in a theory that is advocated on practical 
grounds. The whole question of verification, and its connection with knowledge, is difficult and 

- 657 - 



complex; I will therefore, leave it on one side for the present. The fourth of the above theories, 
which admits events that no one perceives, may also be defended by invalid arguments. It may be 
held that causality is known a priori, and that causal laws are impossible unless there are 
unperceived events. As against this, it may be urged that causality is not a priori, and that 
whatever regularity can be observed must be in relation to percepts. Whatever there is reason to 
believe in the laws of physics must, it would seem, be capable of being stated in tenns of percepts. 
The statement may be odd and complicated; it may lack the characteristic of continuity which, 
until lately, was expected of a physical law. But it can hardly be impossible. 

I conclude that there is no a priori objection to any one of our four theories. It is possible, 
however, to say that all truth is pragmatic, and that there is no pragmatic difference between the 
four theories. If this is true, we can adopt whichever we please, and the difference between them is 
only linguistic. I cannot accept this view; but this, also, is a matter for discussion at a later stage. 

It remains to be asked whether any meaning can be attached to the words "mind" and "matter." 
Every one knows that "mind" is what an idealist thinks there is nothing else but, and "matter" is 
what a materialist thinks the same about. The reader knows also, I hope, that idealists are virtuous 
and materialists are wicked. But perhaps there may be more than this to be said. 

My own definition of "matter" may seem unsatisfactory; I should define it as what satisfies the 
equations of physics. There may be nothing satisfying these equations; in that case either physics 
or the concept "matter" is a mistake. If we reject substance, "matter" will have to be a logical 
construction. Whether it can be any construction composed of events— which may be partly 
inferred— is a difficult question, but by no means an insoluble one. 

As for "mind," when substance has been rejected a mind must be some group or structure of 
events. The grouping, must be effected by some relation which is characteristic of the sort of 
phenomena we wish to call "mental." We may take memory as typical. We might-though this 
would be rather unduly simple-define a "mental" event as one which remembers or is 
remembered. Then the "mind" to which a given mental event belongs is the group of events 
connected with the given event by memory-chains, backwards or forwards. 


- 658 - 



It will be seen that, according to the above definitions, a mind and a piece of matter are, each of 
them, a group of events. There is no reason why every event should belong to a group of one kind 
or the other, and there is no reason why some events should not belong to both groups; therefore 
some events may be neither mental nor material, and other events may be both. As to this, only 
detailed empirical considerations can decide. 

CHAPTER XVII Hume 

DAVID HUME (171 1-76) is one of the most important among philosophers, because he 
developed to its logical conclusion the empirical philosophy of Locke and Berkeley, and by 
making it self-consistent made it incredible. He represents, in a certain sense, a dead end: in his 
direction, it is impossible to go further. To refute him has been, ever since he wrote, a favourite 
pastime among metaphysicians. For my part, I find none of their refutations convincing; 
nevertheless, I cannot but hope that something less sceptical than Hume's system may be 
discoverable. 

His chief philosophical work, the Treatise of Human Nature, was written while he was living in 
France during the years 1734 to 1737. The first two volumes were published in 1739, the third in 
1740. He was a very young man, not yet in his thirties; he was not well known, and his 
conclusions were such as almost all schools would find unwelcome. He hoped for vehement 
attacks, which he would meet with brilliant retorts. Instead, no one noticed the book; as he says 
himself, "it fell dead-bom from the press." "But," he adds, "being naturally of a cheerful and 
sanguine temper, I very soon recovered from the blow." He devoted himself to the writing of 
essays, of which he produced the first volume in 1741. In 1744 he made an unsuccessful attempt 
to obtain a professorship at Edinburgh; having failed in this, he became first tutor to a lunatic and 
then secretary to a general. 


- 659 - 



Fortified by these credentials, he ventured again into philosophy. He shortened the Treatise by 
leaving out the best parts and most of the reasons for his conclusions; the result was the Inquiry 
into Human Understanding, for a long time much better known than the Treatise. It was this book 
that awakened Kant from his "dogmatic slumbers"; he does not appear to have known the 
Treatise. 

He wrote also Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, which he kept unpublished during his 
lifetime. By his direction, they were published posthumously in 1779. His Essay on Miracles, 
which became famous, maintains that there can never be adequate historical evidence for such 
events. 

His History of England, published in 1755 and following years, devoted itself to proving the 
superiority of Tories to Whigs and of Scotchmen to Englishmen; he did not consider history 
worthy of philosophic detachment. He visited Paris in 1763, and was made much of by the 
philosophes. Unfortunately, he formed a friendship with Rousseau, and had a famous quarrel with 
him. Hume behaved with admirable forbearance, but Rousseau, who suffered from persecution 
mania, insisted upon a violent breach. 

Hume has described his own character in a self-obituary, or "funeral oration," as he calls it: "I was 
a man of mild dispositions, of command of temper, of an open, social and cheerful humour, 
capable of attachment, but little susceptible of enmity, and of great moderation in all my passions. 
Even my love of literary fame, my ruling passion, never soured my temper, notwithstanding my 
frequent disappointments." All this is borne out by everything that is known of him. 

Hume Treatise of Human Nature is divided into three books, dealing respectively with the 
understanding, the passions, and morals. What is important and novel in his doctrines is in the 
first book, to which I shall confine myself. 

He begins with the distinction between "impressions" and "ideas." These are two kinds of 
perceptions, of which impressions are those that have more force and violence. "By ideas I mean 
the faint images of these in thinking and reasoning." Ideas, at least when simple, are like 
impressions, but fainter. "Every simple idea has a simple impression, which resembles it; and 
every simple impression a correspondent idea." "All our simple ideas in their first appearance are 
derived from simple impressions, which are correspondent to them, and which they 


- 660 - 



exactly represent." Complex ideas, on the other hand, need not resemble impressions. We can 
imagine a winged horse without having ever seen one, but the constituents of this complex idea 
are all derived from impressions. The proof that impressions come first is derived from 
experience; for example, a man born blind has no ideas of colours. Among ideas, those that retain 
a considerable degree of the vivacity of the original impressions belong to memory, the others to 
imagination . 

There is a section (Book I, Part I, Sec. VII) "Of Abstract Ideas," which opens with a paragraph of 
emphatic agreement with Berkeley's doctrine that "all general ideas are nothing but particular 
ones, annexed to a certain term, which gives them a more extensive significance, and makes them 
recall upon occasion other individuals, which are similar to them." He contends that, when we 
have an idea of a man, it has all the particularity that the impression of a man has. "The mind 
cannot fonn any notion of quantity or quality without forming a precise notion of degrees of 
each. ""Abstract ideas are in themselves individual, however they may become general in their 
representation." This theory, which is a modern form of nominalism, has two defects, one logical, 
the other psychological. To begin with the logical objection: "When we have found a resemblance 
among several objects," Hume says, "we apply the same name to all of them." Every nominalist 
would agree. But in fact a common name, such as "cat," is just as unreal as the universal CAT is. 
The nominalist solution of the problem of universals thus fails through being insufficiently drastic 
in the application of its own principles; it mistakenly applies these principles only to "things," and 
not also to words. 

The psychological objection is more serious, at least in connection with Hume. The whole theory 
of ideas as copies of impressions, as he sets it forth, suffers from ignoring vagueness. When, for 
example, I have seen a flower of a certain colour, and I afterwards call up an image of it, the 
image is lacking in precision, in this sense, that there are several closely similar shades of colour 
of which it might be an image, or "idea," in Hume's terminology. It is not true that "the mind 
cannot fonn any notion of quantity or quality without forming a precise notion of degrees of 
each." Suppose you have seen a man whose height is six feet one inch. You retain an image of 
him, but it probably would fit a man half an inch taller or shorter. Vagueness 


- 661 - 



is different from generality, but has some of the same characteristics. By not noticing it, Hume 
runs into unnecessary difficulties, for instance, as to the possibility of imagining a shade of colour 
you have never seen, which is intermediate between two closely similar shades that you have seen. 
If these two are sufficiently similar, any image you can form will be equally applicable to both of 
them and to the intennediate shade. When Hume says that ideas are derived from impressions 
which they exactly represent he goes beyond what is psychologically true. 

Hume banished the conception of substance from psychology, as Berkeley had banished it from 
physics. There is, he says, no impression of self, and therefore no idea of self (Book I, Part IV, 

Sec. VI). "For my part, when I enter most intimately into what I call myself, I always stumble on 
some particular perception or other, of heat or cold, light or shade, love or hatred, pain or pleasure. 
I never catch myself at any time without a perception, and never can observe anything but the 
perception." There may, he ironically concedes, be some philosophers who can perceive their 
selves; "but setting aside some metaphysicians of this kind, I may venture to affirm of the rest of 
mankind, that they are nothing but a bundle or collection of different perceptions, which succeed 
each other with inconceivable rapidity, and are in a perpetual flux and movement." 

This repudiation of the idea of the Self is of great importance. Let us see exactly what it maintains, 
and how far it is valid. To begin with, the Self, if there is such a thing, is never perceived, and 
therefore we can have no idea of it. If this argument is to be accepted, it must be carefully stated. 
No man perceives his own brain, yet, in an important sense, he has an "idea" of it. Such "ideas," 
which are inferences from perceptions, are not among the logically basic stock of ideas; they are 
complex and descriptive— this must be the case if Hume is right in his principle that all simple 
ideas are derived from impressions, and if this principle is rejected, we are forced back on "innate" 
ideas. Using modem tenninology, we may say: Ideas of unperceived things or occurrences can 
always be defined in terms of perceived things or occurrences, and therefore, by substituting the 
definition for the term defined, we can always state what we know empirically without 
introducing any unperceived things or occurrences. As regards our present problem, all 
psychological knowledge can be stated with- 


- 662 - 



out introducing the "Self." Further, the "Self," as defined, can be nothing but a bundle of 
perceptions, not a new simple "thing." In this I think that any thoroughgoing empiricist must agree 
with Hume. 

It does not follow that there is no simple Self; it only follows that we cannot know whether there 
is or not, and that the Self, except as a bundle of perceptions, cannot enter into any part of our 
knowledge. This conclusion is important in metaphysics, as getting rid of the last surviving use of 
"substance." It is important in theology, as abolishing all supposed knowledge of the "soul." It is 
important in the analysis of knowledge, since it shows that the category of subject and object is 
not fundamental. In this matter of the ego Hume made an important advance on Berkeley. 

The most important part of the whole Treatise is the section called "Of Knowledge and 
Probability." Hume does not mean by "probability" the sort of knowledge contained in the 
mathematical theory of probability, such as that the chance of throwing double sixes with two dice 
is one thirty-sixth. This knowledge is not itself probable in any special sense; it has as much 
certainty as knowledge can have. What Hume is concerned with is uncertain knowledge, such as is 
obtained from empirical data by inferences that are not demonstrative. This includes all our 
knowledge as to the future, and as to unobserved portions of the past and present. In fact, it 
includes everything except, on the one hand, direct observation, and, on the other, logic and 
mathematics. The analysis of such "probable" knowledge led Hume to certain sceptical 
conclusions, which are equally difficult to refute and to accept. The result was a challenge to 
philosophers, which, in my opinion, has still not been adequately met. 

Hume begins by distinguishing seven kinds of philosophical relation: resemblance, identity, 
relations of time and place, proportion in quantity or number, degrees in any quality, contrariety, 
and causation. These, he says, may be divided into two kinds: those that depend only on the ideas, 
and those that can be changed without any change in the ideas. Of the first kind are resemblance, 
contrariety, degrees in quality, and proportions in quantity or number. But spatio-temporal and 
causal relations are of the second kind. Only relations of the first kind give certain knowledge; our 
knowledge concerning the others is only probable. Algebra and arithmetic are the only sciences in 
which we can carry on a long chain of reasoning without losing certainty. 


- 663 - 



Geometry is not so certain as algebra and arithmetic, because we cannot be sure of the truth of its 
axioms. It is a mistake to suppose, as many philosophers do, that the ideas of mathematics "must 
be comprehended by a pure and intellectual view, of which the superior faculties of the soul are 
alone capable." The falsehood of this view is evident, says Hume, as soon as we remember that 
"all our ideas are copied from our impressions." 

The three relations that depend not only on ideas are identity, spatio-temporal relations, and 
causation. In the first two, the mind does not go beyond what is immediately present to the senses. 
(Spatiotemporal relations, Hume holds, can be perceived, and can form parts of impressions.) 
Causation alone enables us to infer some thing or occurrence from some other thing or 
occurrence: '"Tis only causation, which produces such a connexion, as to give us assurance from 
the existence or action of one object, that 'twas followed or preceded by any other existence or 
action." 

A difficulty arises from Hume's contention that there is no such thing as an impression of a causal 
relation. We can perceive, by mere observation of A and B, that A is above B, or to the right of B, 
but not that A causes B. In the past, the relation of causation had been more or less assimilated to 
that of ground and consequent in logic, but this, Hume rightly perceived, was a mistake. 

In the Cartesian philosophy, as in that of the Scholastics, the connection of cause and effect was 
supposed to be necessary, as logical connections are necessary. The first really serious challenge 
to this view came from Hume, with whom the modern philosophy of causation begins. He, in 
common with almost all philosophers down to and including Bergson, supposes the law to state 
that there are propositions of the form "A causes B," where A and B are classes of events; the fact 
that such laws do not occur in any well-developed science appears to be unknown to philosophers. 
But much of what they have said can be translated so as to be applicable to causal laws such as do 
occur; we may, therefore, ignore this point for the present. 

Hume begins by observing that the power by which one object produces another is not 
discoverable from the ideas of the two objects, and that we can therefore only know cause and 
effect from experience, not from reasoning or reflection. The statement "what begins must have a 
cause," he says, is not one that has intuitive certainty, like 


- 664 - 



the statements of logic. As he puts it: "There is no object, which implies the existence of any other 
if we consider these objects in themselves, and never look beyond the ideas which we form of 
them." Hume argues from this that it must be experience that gives knowledge of cause and effect, 
but that it cannot be merely the experience of the two events A and B which are in a causal 
relation to each other. It must be experience, because the connection is not logical; and it cannot 
be merely the experience of the particular events A and B, since we can discover nothing in A by 
itself which should lead it to produce B. The experience required, he says, is that of the constant 
conjunction of events of the kind A with events of the kind B. He points out that when, in 
experience, two objects are constantly conjoined, we do in fact infer one from the other. (When he 
says "infer," he means that perceiving the one makes us expect the other; he does not mean a 
formal or explicit inference.) "Perhaps, the necessary connection depends on the inference," not 
vice versa. That is to say, the sight of A causes the expectation of B, and so leads us to believe that 
there is a necessary connection between A and B. The inference is not determined by reason, since 
that would require us to assume the uniformity of nature, which itself is not necessary, but only 
inferred from experience. 

Hume is thus led to the view that, when we say "A causes B," we mean only that A and B are 
constantly conjoined in fact, not that there is some necessary connection between them. "We have 
no other notion of cause and effect, but that of certain objects, which have been always conjoined 
together. ... We cannot penetrate into the reason of the conjunction." 

He backs up his theory with a definition of "belief," which is, he maintains, "a lively idea related 
to or associated with a present impression." Through association, if A and B have been constantly 
conjoined in past experience, the impression of A produces that lively idea of B which constitutes 
belief in B. This explains why we believe A and B to be connected: the percept of A is connected 
with the idea of B, and so we come to think that A is connected with B, though this opinion is 
really groundless. "Objects have no discoverable connexion together; nor is it from any other 
principle but custom operating upon the imagination, that we can draw any inference from the 
appearance of one to the experience of another." He repeats many 


- 665 - 



times the contention that what appears to us as necessary connection among objects is really only 
connection among the ideas of those objects: the mind is determined by custom, and '"tis this 
impression, or determination, which affords me the idea of necessity." The repetition of instances, 
which leads us to the belief that A causes B, gives nothing new in the object, but in the mind leads 
to an association of ideas; thus "necessity is something that exists in the mind, not in objects." 

Let us now ask ourselves what we are to think of Hume's doctrine. It has two parts, one objective, 
the other subjective. The objective part says: When we judge that A causes B, what has in fact 
happened, so far as A and B are concerned, is that they have been frequently observed to be 
conjoined, i.e., A has been immediately, or very quickly, followed by B; we have no right to say 
that A must be followed by B, or will be followed by B on future occasions. Nor have we any 
ground for supposing that, however often A is followed by B, any relation beyond sequence is 
involved. In fact, causation is definable in tenns of sequence, and is not an independent notion. 

The subjective part of the doctrine says: The frequently observed conjunction of A and B causes 
the impression of A to cause the idea of B. But if we are to define "cause" as is suggested in the 
objective part of the doctrine, we must reword the above. Substituting the definition of "cause," 
the above becomes: 

"It has been frequently observed that the frequently observed conjunction of two objects A and B 
has been frequently followed by occasions on which the impression of A was followed by the idea 
of B." 

This statement, we may admit, is true, but it has hardly the scope that Hume attributes to the 
subjective part of his doctrine. He contends, over and over again, that the frequent conjunction of 
A and B gives no reason for expecting them to be conjoined in the future, but is merely a cause of 
this expectation. That is to say: Experience of frequent conjunction is frequently conjoined with a 
habit of association. But, if the objective part of Hume's doctrine is accepted, the fact that, in the 
past, associations have been frequently formed in such circumstances, is no reason for supposing 
that they will continue, or that new ones will be fonned in similar circumstances. The fact is that, 
where psychology is concerned, Hume allows himself to 


- 666 - 



believe in causation in a sense which, in general, he condemns. Let us take an illustration. I see an 
apple, and expect that, if I eat it, I shall experience a certain kind of taste. According to Hume, 
there is no reason why I should experience this kind of taste: the law of habit explains the 
existence of my expectation, but does not justify it. But the law of habit is itself a causal law. 
Therefore if we take Hume seriously we must say: Although in the past the sight of an apple has 
been conjoined with expectation of a certain kind of taste, there is no reason why it should 
continue to be so conjoined: perhaps the next time I see an apple I shall expect it to taste like roast 
beef. You may, at the moment, think this unlikely; but that is no reason for expecting that you will 
think it unlikely five minutes hence. If Hume's objective doctrine is right, we have no better 
reason for expectations in psychology than in the physical world. Hume's theory might be 
caricatured as follows: "The proposition 'A causes B' means 'the impression of A causes the idea 
of B.'" As a definition, this is not a happy effort. 

We must therefore examine Hume's objective doctrine more closely. This doctrine has two parts: 

( 1) When we say "A causes B," all that we have a right to say is that, in past experience, A and B 
have frequently appeared together or in rapid succession, and no instance has been observed of A 
not followed or accompanied by B. (2) However many instances we may have observed of the 
conjunction of A and B, that gives no reason for expecting them to be conjoined on a future 
occasion, though it is a cause of this expectation, i.e., it has been frequently observed to be 
conjoined with such an expectation. These two parts of the doctrine may be stated as follows: (1) 
in causation there is no indefinable relation except conjunction or succession; (2) induction by 
simple enumeration is not a valid fonn of argument. Empiricists in general have accepted the first 
of these theses and rejected the second. When I say they have rejected the second, I mean that they 
have believed that, given a sufficiently vast accumulation of instances of a conjunction, the 
likelihood of the conjunction being found in the next instance will exceed a half; or, if they have 
not held exactly this, they have maintained some doctrine having similar consequences. 

I do not wish, at the moment, to discuss induction, which is a large and difficult subject; for the 
moment, I am content to observe that, if the first half of Hume's doctrine is admitted, the rejection 
of indue - 


- 667 - 



tion makes all expectation as to the future irrational, even the expectation that we shall continue to 
feel expectations. I do not mean merely that our expectations may be mistaken; that, in any case, 
must be admitted. I mean that, taking even our firmest expectations, such as that the sun will rise 
tomorrow, there is not a shadow of a reason for supposing them more likely to be verified than 
not. With this proviso, I return to the meaning of "cause." 

Those who disagree with Hume maintain that "cause" is a specific relation, which entails 
invariable sequence, but is not entailed by it. To revert to the clocks of the Cartesians: two 
perfectly accurate chronometers might strike the hours one after the other invariably, without 
either being the cause of the other's striking. In general, those who take this view maintain that we 
can sometimes perceive causal relations, though in most cases we are obliged to infer them, more 
or less precariously, from constant conjunction. Let us see what arguments there are for and 
against Hume on this point. 

Hume summarizes his argument as follows: 

"I am sensible, that of all the paradoxes, which I have had, or shall hereafter have occasion to 
advance in the course of this treatise, the present one is the most violent, and that 'tis merely by 
dint of solid proof and reasoning I can ever hope it will have admission, and overcome the 
inveterate prejudices of mankind. Before we are reconcil’d to this doctrine, how often must we 
repeat to ourselves, that the simple view of any two objects or actions, however related, can never 
give us any idea of power, or of a connexion betwixt them: that this idea arises from a repetition 
of their union: that the repetition neither discovers nor causes anything in the objects, but has an 
influence only on the mind, by that customary transition it produces: that this customary transition 
is, therefore, the same with the power and necessity, which are consequently felt by the soul, and 
not perceiv'd externally in bodies?" 

Hume is commonly accused of having too atomic a view of perception, but he allows that certain 
relations can be perceived. "We ought not," he says, "to receive as reasoning any of the 
observations we make concerning identity, and the relations of time and place', since in none of 
them the mind can go beyond what is immediately present to the senses." Causation, he says, is 
different in that it takes us beyond the impressions of our senses, and infonns us of unperceived 
existences. 


- 668 - 



As an argument, this seems invalid. We believe in many relations of time and place which we 
cannot perceive: we think that time extends backwards and forwards, and space beyond the walls 
of our room. Hume's real argument is that, while we sometimes perceive relations of time and 
place, we never perceive causal relations, which must therefore, if admitted, be inferred from 
relations that can be perceived. The controversy is thus reduced to one of empirical fact: Do we, or 
do we not, sometimes perceive a relation which can be called causal? Hume says no, his 
adversaries say yes, and it is not easy to see how evidence can be produced by either side. 

I think perhaps the strongest argument on Hume's side is to be derived from the character of 
causal laws in physics. It appears that simple rules of the form "A causes B" are never to be 
admitted in science, except as crude suggestions in early stages. The causal laws by which such 
simple rules are replaced in well-developed sciences are so complex that no one can suppose them 
given in perception; they are all, obviously, elaborate inferences from the observed course of 
nature. I am leaving out of account modem quantum theory, which reinforces the above 
conclusion. So far as the physical sciences are concerned, Hume is wholly in the right: such 
propositions as "A causes B" are never to be accepted, and our inclination to accept them is to be 
explained by the laws of habit and association. These laws themselves, in their accurate fonn, will 
be elaborate statements as to nervous tissue— primarily its physiology, then its chemistry, and 
ultimately its physics. 

The opponent of Hume, however, even if he admits the whole of what has just been said about the 
physical sciences, may not yet admit himself decisively defeated. He may say that in psychology 
we have cases where a causal relation can be perceived. The whole conception of cause is 
probably derived from volition, and it may be said that we can perceive a relation, between a 
volition and the consequent act, which is something more than invariable sequence. The same 
might be said of the relation between a sudden pain and a cry. Such views, however, are rendered 
very difficult by physiology. Between the will to move my arm and the consequent movement 
there is a long chain of causal intermediaries consisting of processes in the nerves and muscles. 

We perceive only the end tenns of this process, the volition and the movement, and if we think we 
see a direct causal 


- 669 - 



connection between these we are mistaken. This argument is not conclusive on the general 
question, but it shows that it is rash to suppose that we perceive causal relations when we think 
we do. The balance, therefore, is in favour of Hume's view that there is nothing in cause except 
invariable succession. The evidence, however, is not so conclusive as Hume supposed. 

Hume is not content with reducing the evidence of a causal connection to experience of 
frequent conjunction; he proceeds to argue that such experience does not justify the expectation 
of similar conjunctions in the future. For example: when (to repeat a former illustration) I see an 
apple, past experience makes me expect that it win taste like an apple, and not like roast beef; 
but there is no rational justification for this expectation. If there were such a justification, it 
would have to proceed from the principle "that those instances, of which we have had no 
experience, resemble those of which we have had experience." This principle is not logically 
necessary, since we can at least conceive a change in the course of nature. It should therefore be 
a principle of probability. But all probable arguments assume this principle, and therefore it 
cannot itself be proved by any probable argument, or even rendered probable by any such 
argument. "The supposition, that the future resembles the past, is not founded on arguments of 
any kind, but is derived entirely from habit. fyThe conclusion is one of complete scepticism: 

"All probable reasoning is nothing but a species of sensation. 'Tis not solely in poetry and 
music, we must follow our taste and sentiment, but likewise in philosophy. When I am 
convinced of any principle, 'tis only an idea, which strikes more strongly upon me. When I give 
the preference to one set of arguments above another, I do nothing but decide from my feeling 
concerning the superiority of their influence. Objects have no discoverable connexion together; 
nor is it from any other principle but custom operating upon the imagination, that we can draw 

any inference from the appearance of one to the existence of another." 

The ultimate outcome of Hume's investigation of what passes for knowledge is not what we 
must suppose him to have desired. The sub-title of his book is: "An attempt to introduce the 
experimental 


* Book I, Part III, Sec. IV. 

I Book I, Part III, Sec. VIII. 


- 670 - 


method of reasoning into moral subjects." It is evident that he started out with a belief that 
scientific method yields the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth; he ended, however, 
with the conviction that belief is never rational, since we know nothing. After setting forth the 
arguments for scepticism (Book I, Part IV, Sec. I), he goes on, not to refute the arguments, but to 
fall back on natural credulity. 

"Nature, by an absolute and uncontrollable necessity has determined us to judge as well as to 
breathe and feel; nor can we any more forbear viewing certain objects in a stronger and fuller 
light, upon account of their customary connexion with a present impression, than we can hinder 
ourselves from thinking as long as we are awake, or seeing the surrounding bodies, when we turn 
our eyes towards them in broad sunshine. Whoever has taken the pains to refute this total 
scepticism, has really disputed without an antagonist, and endeavoured by arguments to establish a 
faculty, which nature has antecedently implanted in the mind, and rendered unavoidable. My 
intention then in displaying so carefully the arguments of that fantastic sect, is only to make the 
reader sensible of the truth of my hypothesis, that all our reasonings concerning causes and 
effects are derived from nothing but custom; and that belief is more properly an act of the 
sensitive, than of the cogitative part of our natures." 

"The sceptic," he continues (Book I, Part IV, Sec. II), "still continues to reason and believe, even 
though he asserts that he cannot defend his reason by reason; and by the same rule he must assent 
to the principle concerning the existence of body, tho' he cannot pretend by any arguments of 
philosophy to maintain its veracity ... We may well ask, what causes us to believe in the 
existence of body] But 'tis vain to ask, whether there be body or not ? That is a point, which we 
must take for granted in all our reasonings." 

The above is the beginning of a section "Of scepticism with regard to the senses." After a long 
discussion, this section ends with the following conclusion: 

"This sceptical doubt, both with respect to reason and the senses, is a malady, which can never be 
radically cured, but must return upon us every moment, however we may chase it away, and 
sometimes may seem entirely free from it. . . . Carelessness and inattention alone can afford us 
any remedy. For this reason I rely entirely 


- 671 - 



upon them; and take it for granted, whatever may be the reader's opinion at this present moment, 
that an hour hence he will be persuaded there is both an external and internal world." 

There is no reason for studying philosophy— so Hume maintains-except that, to certain 
temperaments, this is an agreeable way of passing the time. "In all the incidents of life we ought 
still to preserve our scepticism. If we believe, that fire warms, or water refreshes, 'tis only because 
it costs us too much pains to think otherwise. Nay if we are philosophers, it ought only to be upon 
sceptical principles, and from an inclination, which we feel to be employing ourselves after that 
manner." If he abandoned speculation, "I feel I should be a loser in point of pleasure; and this is 
the origin of my philosophy." 

Hume's philosophy, whether true or false, represents the bankruptcy of eighteenth-century 
reasonableness. He starts out, like Locke, with the intention of being sensible and empirical, 
taking nothing on trust, but seeking whatever instruction is to be obtained from experience and 
observation. But having a better intellect than Locke's, a greater acuteness in analysis, and a 
smaller capacity for accepting comfortable inconsistencies, he arrives at the disastrous conclusion 
that from experience and observation nothing is to be learnt. There is no such thing as a rational 
belief: "If we believe that fire warms, or water refreshes, 'tis only because it costs us too much 
pains to think otherwise." We cannot help believing, but no belief can be grounded in reason. Nor 
can one line of action be more rational than another, since all alike are based upon irrational 
convictions. This last conclusion, however, Hume seems not to have drawn. Even in his most 
sceptical chapter, in which he sums up the conclusions of Book I, he says: "Generally speaking, 
the errors in religion are dangerous; those in philosophy only ridiculous." He has no right to say 
this. "Dangerous" is a causal word, and a sceptic as to causation cannot know that anything is 
"dangerous." 

In fact, in the later portions of the Treatise, Hume forgets all about his fundamental doubts, and 
writes much as any other enlightened moralist of his time might have written; he applies to his 
doubts the remedy that he recommends, namely "carelessness and inattention." In a sense, his 
scepticism is insincere, since he cannot maintain it in practice. It has, however, this awkward 
consequence, 


- 672 - 



that it paralyses every effort to prove one line of action better than another. 

It was inevitable that such a self-refutation of rationality should be followed by a great outburst of 
irrational faith. The quarrel between Hume and Rousseau is symbolic: Rousseau was mad but 
influential, Hume was sane but had no followers. Subsequent British empiricists rejected his 
scepticism without refuting it; Rousseau and his followers agreed with Hume that no belief is 
based on reason, but thought the heart superior to reason, and allowed it to lead them to 
convictions very different from those that Hume retained in practice. Gennan philosophers, from 
Kant to Hegel, had not assimilated Hume's arguments. I say this deliberately, in spite of the belief 
which many philosophers share with Kant, that his Critique of Pure Reason answered Hume. In 
fact, these philosophers— at least Kant and Hegel— represent a pre-Humian type of rationalism, and 
can be refuted by Humian arguments. The philosophers who cannot be refuted in this way are 
those who do not pretend to be rational, such as Rousseau, Schopenhauer, and Nietzsche. The 
growth of unreason throughout the nineteenth century and what has passed of the twentieth is a 
natural sequel to Hume’s destruction of empiricism. 

It is therefore important to discover whether there is any answer to Hume within the framework of 
a philosophy that is wholly or mainly empirical. If not, there is no intellectual difference between 
sanity and insanity. The lunatic who believes that he is a poached egg is to be condemned solely 
on the ground that he is in a minority, or rather— since we must not assume democracy— on the 
ground that the government does not agree with him. This is a desperate point of view, and it must 
be hoped that there is some way of escaping from it. 

Hume's scepticism rests entirely upon his rejection of the principle of induction. The principle of 
induction, as applied to causation, says that, if A has been found very often accompanied or 
followed by B, and no instance is known of A not being accompanied or followed by B, then it is 
probable that on the next occasion on which A is observed it will be accompanied or followed by 
B. If the principle is to be adequate, a sufficient number of instances must make the probability 
not far short of certainty. If this principle, or any other from which it can be deduced, is true, then 
the causal inferences which 


- 673 - 

Hume rejects are valid, not indeed as giving certainty, but as giving a sufficient probability for 
practical purposes. If this principle is not true, every attempt to arrive at general scientific laws 
from particular observations is fallacious, and Hume's scepticism is inescapable for an empiricist. 
The principle itself cannot, of course, without circularity, be inferred from observed uniformities, 
since it is required to justify any such inference. It must therefore be, or be deduced from, an 
independent principle not based upon experience. To this extent, Hume has proved that pure 
empiricism is not a sufficient basis for science. But if this one principle is admitted, everything 
else can proceed in accordance with the theory that all our knowledge is based on experience. It 
must be granted that this is a serious departure from pure empiricism, and that those who are not 
empiricists may ask why, if one departure is allowed, others are to be forbidden. These, however, 
are questions not directly raised by Hume's arguments. What these arguments prove— and I do not 
think the proof can be controverted— is that induction is an independent logical principle, 
incapable of being inferred either from experience or from other logical principles, and that 
without this principle science is impossible. 


- 674 - 



Part II. From Rousseau to the Present Day 
CHAPTER XVIII The Romantic Movement 


FROM the latter part of the eighteenth century to the present day, art and literature and 
philosophy, and even politics, have been influenced, positively or negatively, by a way of feeling 
which was characteristic of what, in a large sense, may be called the romantic movement. Even 
those who were repelled by this way of feeling were compelled to take account of it, and in many 
cases were more affected by it than they knew. I propose in this chapter to give a brief description 
of the romantic outlook, chiefly in matters not definitely philosophical; for this is the cultural 
background of most philosophic thought in the period with which we are now to be concerned. 

The romantic movement was not, in its beginnings, connected with philosophy, though it came 
before long to have connections with it. With politics, through Rousseau, it was connected from 
the first. But before we can understand its political and philosophical effects we must consider it 
in its most essential form, which is as a revolt against received ethical and aesthetic standards. 

The first great figure in the movement is Rousseau, but to some extent he only expressed already 
existing tendencies. Cultivated people in eighteenth-century France greatly admired what they 
called la sensibilitA©, which meant a proneness to emotion, and more particularly to the emotion 
of sympathy. To be thoroughly satisfactory, the emotion must be direct and violent and quite 
uninformed by thought. 


- 675 - 



The man of sensibility would be moved to tears by the sight of a single destitute peasant family, 
but would be cold to well-thought-out schemes for ameliorating the lot of peasants as a class. The 
poor were supposed to possess more virtue than the rich; the sage was thought of as a man who 
retires from the corruption of courts to enjoy the peaceful pleasures of an unambitious rural 
existence. As a passing mood, this attitude is to be found in poets of almost all periods. The exiled 
Duke in As You Like It expresses it, though he goes back to his dukedom as soon as he can; only 
the melancholy Jacques sincerely prefers the life of the forest. Even Pope, the perfect exemplar of 
all that the romantic movement rebelled against, says: 

Happy the man whose wish and care A few paternal acres bound, Content to breathe his native air 
On his own ground. 

The poor, in the imaginations of those who cultivated sensibility always had a few paternal acres, 
and lived on the produce of their own labour without the need of external commerce. True, they 
were always losing the acres in pathetic circumstances, because the aged father could no longer 
work, the lovely daughter was going into a decline, and the wicked mortgagee or the wicked lord 
was ready to pounce either on the acres or on the daughter's virtue. The poor, to the romantics, 
were never urban and never industrial; the prole tariat is a nineteenth- century conception, perhaps 
equally roman ticized, but quite different. 

Rousseau appealed to the already existing cult of sensibility, and gave it a breadth and scope that 
it might not otherwise have possessed. He was a democrat, not only in his theories, but in his 
tastes. For long periods of his life, he was a poor vagabond, receiving kindness from people only 
slightly less destitute than himself. He repaid this kindness, in action, often with the blackest 
ingratitude, but in emotion his response was all that the most ardent devotee of sensibility could 
have wished. Having the tastes of a tramp, he found the restraints of Parisian society irksome. 
From him the romantics leamt a contempt for the trammels of convention— first in dress and 
manners, in the minuet and the heroic couplet, then in art and love, and at last over the whole 
sphere of traditional morals. 


- 676 - 



The romantics were not without morals; on the contrary, their moral judgements were sharp and 
vehement. But they were based on quite other principles than those that had seemed good to their 
predecessors. The period from 1660 to Rousseau is dominated by recollections of the wars of 
religion and the civil wars in France and England and Germany. Men were very conscious of the 
danger of chaos, of the anarchic tendencies of all strong passions, of the importance of safety and 
the sacrifices necessary to achieve it. Prudence was regarded as the supreme virtue; intellect was 
valued as the most effective weapon against subversive fanatics; polished manners were praised as 
a barrier against barbarism. Newton's orderly cosmos, in which the planets unchangingly revolve 
about the sun in law-abiding orbits, became an imaginative symbol of good government. Restraint 
in the expression of passion was the chief aim of education, and the surest mark of a gentleman. In 
the Revolution, pre-romantic French aristocrats died quietly; Madame Roland and Danton, who 
were romantics, died rhetorically. 

By the time of Rousseau, many people had grown tired of safety, and had begun to desire 
excitement. The French Revolution and Napoleon gave them their fill of it. When, in 1815, the 
political world returned to tranquillity, it was a tranquillity so dead, so rigid, so hostile to all 
vigorous life, that only terrified conservatives could endure it. Consequently there was no such 
intellectual acquiescence in the status quo as had characterized France under the Roi Soleil and 
England until the French Revolution. Nineteenth-century revolt against the system of the Holy 
Alliance took two forms. On the one hand, there was the revolt of industrialism, both capitalist 
and proletarian, against monarchy and aristocracy; this was almost untouched by romanticism, and 
reverted, in many respects, to the eighteenth century. This movement is represented by the 
philosophical radicals, the free-trade movement, and Marxian socialism. Quite different from this 
was the romantic revolt, which was in part reactionary, in part revolutionary. The romantics did 
not aim at peace and quiet, but at vigorous and passionate individual life. They had no sympathy 
with industrialism, because it was ugly, because money-grubbing seemed to them unworthy of an 
immortal soul, and because the growth of modem economic organizations interfered with 
individual liberty. In the post-revolutionary period they were led into politics, gradually, 


- 677 - 



through nationalism: each nation was felt to have a corporate soul, which could not be free so long 
as the boundaries of States were different from those of nations. In the first half of the nineteenth 
century, nationalism was the most vigorous of revolutionary principles, and most romantics 
ardently favoured it. 

The romantic movement is characterized, as a whole, by the substitution of aesthetic for utilitarian 
standards. The earth-worm is useful, but not beautiful; the tiger is beautiful, but not useful. 

Darwin (who was not a romantic) praised the earth-worm; Blake praised the tiger. The morals of 
the romantics have primarily aesthetic motives. But in order to characterize the romantics, it is 
necessary to take account, not only of the importance of aesthetic motives, but also of the change 
of taste which made their sense of beauty different from that of their predecessors. Of this, their 
preference for Gothic architecture is one of the most obvious examples. Another is their taste in 
scenery. Dr. Johnson preferred Fleet Street to any rural landscape, and maintained that a man who 
is tired of London must be tired of life. If anything in the country was admired by Rousseau's 
predecessors, it was a scene of fertility, with rich pastures and lowing kine. Rousseau, being 
Swiss, naturally admired the Alps. In his disciples' novels and stories, we find wild torrents, 
fearful precipices, pathless forests, thunderstorms, tempests at sea, and generally what is useless, 
destructive, and violent. This change seems to be more or less pennanent: almost everybody, 
nowadays, prefers Niagara and the Grand Canyon to lush meadows and fields of waving com. 
Tourist hotels afford statistical evidence of taste in scenery. 

The temper of the romantics is best studied in fiction. They liked what was strange: ghosts, 
ancient decayed castles, the last melancholy descendants of once-great families, practitioners of 
mesmerism and the occult sciences, falling tyrants and levantine pirates. Fielding and Smollett 
wrote of ordinary people in circumstances that might well have occurred; so did the realists who 
reacted against romanticism. But to the romantics such themes were too pedestrian; they felt 
inspired only by what was grand, remote, and terrifying. Science, of a somewhat dubious sort, 
could be utilized if it led to something astonishing; but in the main the Middle Ages, and what 
was most medieval in the present, pleased the romantics best. Very often they cut loose from 
actuality, either past or present, altogether. The Ancient Mariner 


- 678 - 



is typical in this respect, and Coleridge Kubla Khan is hardly the historical monarch of Marco 
Polo. The geography of the romantics is interesting: from Xanadu to "the lone Chorasmian shore," 
the places in which it is interested are remote, Asiatic, or ancient. 

The romantic movement, in spite of owing its origin to Rousseau, was at first mainly German. The 
German romantics were young in the last years of the eighteenth century, and it was while they 
were young that they gave expression to what was most characteristic in their outlook. Those who 
had not the good fortune to die young, in the end allowed their individuality to be obscured in the 
uniformity of the Catholic Church. (A romantic could become a Catholic if he had been born a 
Protestant, but could hardly be a Catholic otherwise, since it was necessary to combine 
Catholicism with revolt.) The German romantics influenced Coleridge and Shelley, and 
independently of Gennan influence the same outlook became common in England during the early 
years of the nineteenth century. In France, though in a weakened fonn, it flourished after the 
Restoration, down to Victor Hugo. In America it is to be seen almost pure in Melville, Thoreau, 
and Brook Fann, and, somewhat softened, in Emerson and Hawthorne. Although romantics 
tended towards Catholicism, there was something ineradicably Protestant in the individualism of 
their outlook, and their permanent successes in moulding customs, opinions, and institutions were 
almost wholly confined to Protestant countries. 

The beginnings of romanticism in England can be seen in the writings of the satirists. In Sheridan 
Rivals ( 1775), the heroine is determined to marry some poor man for love rather than a rich man 
to please her guardian and his parents; but the rich man whom they have selected wins her love by 
wooing her under an assumed name and pretending to be poor. Jane Austen makes fun of the 
romantics in Northanger Abbey and Sense and Sensibility ( 1797-8). Northanger Abbey has a 
heroine who is led astray by Mrs. Radcliffe's ultraromantic Mysteries of Udolpho, which was 
published in 1794. The first good romantic work in England— apart from Blake, who was a solitary 
Swedenborgian and hardly part of any "movement"— was Coleridge Ancient Mariner, published in 
1799. In the following year, having unfortunately been supplied with funds by the Wedgwoods, he 
went to GATjttingen and became engulfed in Kant, which did not improve his verse. 


- 679 - 



After Coleridge, Wordsworth, and Southey had become reactionaries, hatred of the Revolution 
and Napoleon put a temporary brake on English romanticism. But it was soon revived by Byron, 
Shelley, and Keats, and in some degree dominated the whole Victorian epoch. 

Mary Shelley Frankenstein, written under the inspiration of conversations with Byron in the 
romantic scenery of the Alps, contains what might almost be regarded as an allegorical prophetic 
history of the development of romanticism. Frankenstein's monster is not, as he has become in 
proverbial parlance, a mere monster: he is, at first, a gentle being, longing for human affection, 
but he is driven to hatred and violence by the horror which his ugliness inspires in those whose 
love he attempts to gain. Unseen, he observes a virtuous family of poor cottagers, and 
surreptitiously assists their labours. At length he decides to make him self known to them: 

"The more I saw of them, the greater became my desire to claim their protection and kindness; my 
heart yearned to be known and loved by these amiable creatures; to see their sweet looks directed 
towards me with affection, was the utmost limit of my ambition. I dared not think that they would 
turn from me with disdain and horror." 

But they did. So he first demanded of his creator the creation of a female like himself, and, when 
that was refused, devoted himself to murdering, one by one, all whom Frankenstein loved. But 
even then, when all his murders are accomplished, and while he is gazing upon the dead body of 
Frankenstein, the monster's sentiments remain noble: 

"That also is my victim! in his murder my crimes are consummated; the miserable genius of my 
being is wound to its close! Oh, Frankenstein! generous and self-devoted being! What does it 
avail that I now ask thee to pardon me? I, who irretrievably destroyed thee by destroying all that 
thou lovedst. Alas! he is cold, he cannot answer me. . . . When I run over the frightful catalogue of 
my sins, I cannot believe that I am the same creature whose thoughts were once filled with 
sublime and transcendent visions of the beauty and the majesty of goodness. But it is even so; the 
fallen angel becomes a malignant devil. Yet even that enemy of God and man had friends and 
associates in his desolation; I am alone." 

Robbed of its romantic form, there is nothing unreal in this psychology, and it is unnecessary to 
search out pirates or vandal kings 


- 680 - 



in order to find parallels. To an English visitor, the ex- Kaiser, at Doom, lamented that the English 
no longer loved him. Dr. Burt, in his book on the juvenile delinquent, mentions a boy of seven 
who drowned another boy in the Regent's Canal. His reason was that neither his family nor his 
contemporaries showed him affection. Dr. Burt was kind to him, and he became a respectable 
citizen; but no Dr. Burt undertook the refonnation of Frankenstein’s monster. 

It is not the psychology of the romantics that is at fault: it is their standard of values. They admire 
strong passions, of no matter what kind, and whatever may be their social consequences. 

Romantic love, especially when unfortunate, is strong enough to win their approval, but most of 
the strongest passions are destructive— hate and resentment and jealousy, remorse and despair, 
outraged pride and the fury of the unjustly oppressed, martial ardour and contempt for slaves and 
cowards. Hence the type of man encouraged by romanticism, especially of the Byronic variety, is 
violent and anti-social, an anarchic rebel or a conquering tyrant. 

This outlook makes an appeal for which the reasons he very deep in human nature and human 
circumstances. By self-interest Man has become gregarious, but in instinct he has remained to a 
great extent solitary; hence the need of religion and morality to reinforce selfinterest. But the habit 
of forgoing present satisfactions for the sake of future advantages is irksome, and when passions 
are roused the prudent restraints of social behaviour become difficult to endure. Those who, at 
such times, throw them off, acquire a new energy and sense of power from the cessation of inner 
conflict, and, though they may come to disaster in the end, enjoy meanwhile a sense of godlike 
exaltation which, though known to the great mystics, can never be experienced by a merely 
pedestrian virtue. The solitary part of their nature reasserts itself, but if the intellect survives the 
reassertion must clothe itself in myth. The mystic becomes one with God, and in the 
contemplation of the Infinite feels himself absolved from duty to his neighbour. The anarchic 
rebel does even better: he feels himself not one with God, but God. Truth and duty, which 
represent our subjection to matter and to our neighbours, exist no longer for the man who has 
become God; for others, truth is what he posits, duty what he commands. If we could ah live 
solitary and without labour, 


- 681 - 



we could all enjoy this ecstasy of independence; since we cannot, its delights are only available to 
madmen and dictators. 

Revolt of solitary instincts against social bonds is the key to the philosophy, the politics, and the 
sentiments, not only of what is commonly called the romantic movement, but of its progeny down 
to the present day. Philosophy, under the influence of German idealism, became solipsistic, and 
self-development was proclaimed as the fundamental principle of ethics. As regards sentiment, 
there has to be a distasteful compromise between the search for isolation and the necessities of 
passion and economics. D. H. Lawrence story, "The Man Who Loved Islands, " has a hero who 
disdained such compromise to a gradually increasing extent and at last died of hunger and cold, 
but in the enjoyment of complete isolation; but this degree of consistency has not been achieved 
by the writers who praise solitude. The comforts of civilized life are not obtainable by a hermit, 
and a man who wishes to write books or produce works of art must submit to the ministrations of 
others if he is to survive while he does his work. In order to continue to feel solitary, he must be 
able to prevent those who serve him from impinging upon his ego, which is best accomplished if 
they are slaves. Passionate love, however, is a more difficult matter. So long as passionate lovers 
are regarded as in revolt against social tranunels, they are admired; but in real life the loverelation 
itself quickly becomes a social trammel, and the partner in love comes to be hated, all the more 
vehemently if the love is strong enough to make the bond difficult to break. Hence love comes to 
be conceived as a battle, in which each is attempting to destroy the other by breaking through the 
protecting walls of his or her ego. This point of view has become familiar through the writing of 
Strindberg, and, still more, of D. H. Lawrence. 

Not only passionate love, but every friendly relation to others, is only possible, to this way of 
feeling, in so far as the others can be regarded as a projection of one's own Self. This is feasible if 
the others are blood-relations, and the more nearly they are related the more easily it is possible. 
Hence an emphasis on race, leading, as in the case of the Ptolemys, to endogamy. How this 
affected Byron, we know; Wagner suggests a similar sentiment in the love of Siegmund and 
Sieglinde. Nietzsche, though not scandalously, preferred his sister to all other women: "How 
strongly I feel," he writes to her, "in all 


- 682 - 



that you say and do, that we belong to the same stock. You understand more of me than others do, 
because we come of the same parentage. This fits in very well with my ’philosophy.’" 

The principle of nationality, of which Byron was a protagonist, is an extension of the same 
"philosophy." A nation is assumed to be a race, descended from common ancestors, and sharing 
some kind of "blood-consciousness." Mazzini, who constantly found fault with the English for 
their failure to appreciate Bvron, conceived nations as possessed of a mystical individuality, and 
attributed to them the kind of anarchic greatness that other romantics sought in heroic men. 
Liberty, for nations, came to be regarded, not only by Mazzini, but by comparatively sober 
statesmen, as something absolute, which, in practice, made international cooperation impossible. 

Belief in blood and race is naturally associated with anti-Semitism. At the same time, the romantic 
outlook, partly because it is aristocratic, and partly because it prefers passion to calculation, has a 
vehement contempt for commerce and finance. It is thus led to proclaim an opposition to 
capitalism which is quite different from that of the socialist who represents the interest of the 
proletariat, since it is an opposition based on dislike of economic preoccupations, and 
strengthened by the suggestion that the capitalist world is governed by Jews. This point of view is 
expressed by Byron on the rare occasions when he condescends to notice anything so vulgar as 
economic power: 

Who hold the balance of the world? Who reign O’er conquerors, whether royalist or liberal? Who 
rouse the shirtless patriots of Spain? (That make old Europe's journals squeak and gibber all.) 

Who keep the world, both Old and New, in pain Or pleasure? Who make politics run glibber all? 
The shade of Buonaparte's noble daring? Jew Rothschild, and his fellow Christian Baring. 

The verse is perhaps not very musical, but the sentiment is quite of our time, and has been re- 
echoed by all Byron’s followers. 

The romantic movement, in its essence, aimed at liberating human personality from the fetters of 
social convention and social morality. In part, these fetters were a mere useless hindrance to 
desirable fonns 


- 683 - 



of activity, for every ancient community has developed rules of behaviour for which there is 
nothing to be said except that they are traditional. But egoistic passions, when once let loose, are 
not easily brought again into subjection to the needs of society. Christianity had succeeded, to 
some extent, in taming the Ego, but economic, political, and intellectual causes stimulated revolt 
against the Churches, and the romantic movement brought the revolt into the sphere of morals. By 
encouraging a new lawless Ego it made social cooperation impossible, and left its disciples faced 
with the alternative of anarchy or despotism. Egoism, at first, made men expect from others a 
parental tenderness; but when they discovered, with indignation, that others had their own Ego, 
the disappointed desire for tenderness turned to hatred and violence. Man is not a solitary animal, 
and so long as social life survives, self-realization cannot be the supreme principle of ethics. 

CHAPTER XIX Rousseau 

JEAN JACQUES ROUSSEAU ( 1712-1778), though a philosophe in the eighteenth-century 
French sense, was not what would now be called a "philosopher." Nevertheless he had a powerful 
influence on philosophy, as on literature and taste and manners and politics. Whatever may be our 
opinion of his merits as a thinker, we must recognize his immense importance as a social force. 
This importance came mainly from his appeal to the heart, and to what, in his day, was called 
"sensibility." He is the father of the romantic movement, the initiator of systems of thought which 
infer non-human facts from human emotions, and the inventor of the political philosophy of 
pseudo-democratic dictatorships as opposed to traditional absolute monarchies. Ever since his 
time, those who considered themselves reformers have been divided into two groups. 

-684- 



those who followed him and those who followed Locke. Sometimes they cooperated, and many 
individuals saw no incompatibility. But gradually the incompatibility has become increasingly 
evident. At the present time, Hitler is an outcome of Rousseau; Roosevelt and Churchill, of 
Locke. 

Rousseau's biography was related by himself in his Confessions in great detail, but without any 
slavish regard for truth. He enjoyed making himself out a great sinner, and sometimes exaggerated 
in this respect; but there is abundant external evidence that he was destitute of all the ordinary 
virtues. This did not trouble him, because he considered that he always had a wann heart, which, 
however, never hindered him from base actions towards his best friends. I shall relate only so 
much of his life as is necessary in order to understand his thought and his influence. 

He was born in Geneva, and educated as an orthodox Calvinist. His father, who was poor, 
combined the professions of watch-maker and dancing-master; his mother died when he was an 
infant, and he was brought up by an aunt. He left school at the age of twelve, and was apprenticed 
to various trades, but hated them all, and at the age of sixteen fled from Geneva to Savoy. Having 
no means of subsistence, he went to a Catholic priest and represented himself as wishing to be 
converted. The formal conversion took place at Turin, in an institution for catechumens; the 
process lasted nine days. He represents his motives as wholly mercenary: "I could not dissemble 
from myself that the holy deed I was about to do was at bottom the act of a bandit." But this was 
written after he had reverted to Protestantism, and there is reason to think that for some years he 
was a sincerely believing Catholic. In 1742 he testified that a house in which he was living in 
1730 had been miraculously saved from a fire by a bishop's prayers. 

Having been turned out of the institution at Turin with twenty francs in his pocket, he became 
lackey to a lady named Madame de Vercelli, who died three months later. At her death, he was 
found to be in possession of a ribbon which had belonged to her, which in fact he had stolen. He 
asserted that it had been given him by a certain maid, whom he liked; his assertion was believed, 
and she was punished. His excuse is odd: "Never was wickedness further from me than at this 
cruel moment; and when I accused the poor girl, it is 


- 685 - 



contradictory and yet it is true that my affection for her was the cause of what I did. She was 
present to my mind, and I threw the blame from myself on the first object that presented itself." 
This is a good example of the way in which, in Rousseau's ethic, "sensibility" took the place of all 
the ordinary virtues. 

After this incident, he was befriended by Madame de Warens, a convert from Protestantism like 
himself, a charming lady who enjoyed a pension from the king of Savoy in consideration of her 
services to religion. For nine or ten years, most of his time was spent in her house; he called her 
"maman" even after she became his mistress. For a while he shared her with her factotum; all 
lived in the greatest amity, and when the factotum died Rousseau felt grief, but consoled himself 
with the thought: "Well, at any rate I shall get his clothes." 

During his early years there were various periods which he spent as a vagabond, travelling on foot, 
and picking up a precarious livelihood as best he could. During one of these interludes, a friend, 
with whom he was travelling, had an epileptic fit in the streets of Lyons; Rousseau profited by the 
crowd which gathered to abandon his friend in the middle of the fit. On another occasion he 
became secretary to a man who represented himself as an archimandrite on the way to the Holy 
Sepulchre; on yet another, he had an affair with a rich lady, by masquerading as a Scotch Jacobite 
named Dudding. 

However, in 1743, through the help of a great lady, he became secretary to the French 
Ambassador to Venice, a sot named Montaigu, who left the work to Rousseau but neglected to 
pay his salary. Rousseau did the work well, and the inevitable quarrel was not his fault. He went 
to Paris to try to obtain justice; everybody admitted that he was in the right, but for a long time 
nothing was done. The vexations of this delay had something to do with turning Rousseau against 
the existing fonn of government in France, although, in the end, he received the arrears of salary 
that were due to him. 

It was at about this time ( 1745) that he took up with ThA©rA"se le Vasseur, who was a servant at 
his hotel in Paris. He lived with her for the rest of his life (not to the exclusion of other affairs); he 
had five children by her, all of whom he took to the Foundling Hospital. No one has ever 
understood what attracted him to her. She was ugly and ignorant; she could neither read nor write 
(he taught her to write, but not to read); she did not know the names of the months, 


- 686 - 



and could not add up money. Her mother was grasping and avaricious; the two together used 
Rousseau and all his friends as sources of income. Rousseau asserts (truly or falsely) that he never 
had a spark of love for ThA©rA"se; in later years she drank, and ran after stable-boys. Probably he 
liked the feeling that he was indubitably superior to her, both financially and intellectually, and 
that she was completely dependent upon him. He was always uncomfortable in the company of the 
great, and genuinely preferred simple people; in this respect his democratic feeling was wholly 
sincere. Although he never married her, he treated her almost as a wife, and all the grand ladies 
who befriended him had to put up with her. 

His first literary success came to him rather late in life. The Academy of Dijon offered a prize for 
the best essay on the question: Have the arts and sciences conferred benefits on mankind? 
Rousseau maintained the negative, and won the prize ( 1750). He contended that science, letters, 
and the arts are the worst enemies of morals, and, by creating wants, are the sources of slavery; for 
how can chains be imposed on those who go naked, like American savages? As might be 
expected, he is for Sparta, and against Athens. He had read Plutarch Lives at the age of seven, and 
been much influenced by them; he admired particularly the life of Lycurgus. Like the Spartans, he 
took success in war as the test of merit; nevertheless, he admired the "noble savage," whom 
sophisticated Europeans could defeat in war. Science and virtue, he held, are incompatible, and all 
sciences have an ignoble origin. Astronomy comes from the superstition of astrology; eloquence 
from ambition; geometry from avarice; physics from vain curiosity; and even ethics has its source 
in human pride. Education and the art of printing are to be deplored; everything that distinguishes 
civilized man from the untutored barbarian is evil. 

Having won the prize and achieved sudden fame by this essay, Rousseau took to living according 
to its maxims. He adopted the simple life, and sold his watch, saying that he would no longer need 
to know the time. 

The ideas of the first essay were elaborated in a second, a " Discourse on Inequality” ( 1754), 
which, however, failed to win a prize. He held that "man is naturally good, and only by 
institutions is he made bad" —the antithesis of the doctrine of original sin and salvation through 
the Church. Like most political theorists of his age, he spoke of a 


- 687 - 



state of nature, though somewhat hypothetically, as "a state which exists no longer, perhaps never 
existed, probably never will exist, and of which none the less it is necessary to have just ideas, in 
order to judge well our present state." Natural law should be deduced from the state of nature, but 
as long as we are ignorant of natural man it is impossible to detennine the law originally 
prescribed or best suited to him. All we can know is that the wills of those subject to it must be 
conscious of their submission, and it must come directly from the voice of nature. He does not 
object to natural inequality, in respect of age, health, intelligence, etc., but only to inequality 
resulting from privileges authorized by convention. 

The origin of civil society and of the consequent social inequalities is to be found in private 
property. "The first man who, having enclosed a piece of land, bethought himself of saying ’this is 
mine,' and found people simple enough to believe him, was the real founder of civil society." He 
goes on to say that a deplorable revolution introduced metallurgy and agriculture; grain is the 
symbol of our misfortune. Europe is the unhappiest Continent, because it has the most grain and 
the most iron. To undo the evil, it is only necessary to abandon civilization, for man is naturally 
good, and savage man, when he has dined, is at peace with all nature and the friend of all his 
fellow-creatures (my italics). 

Rousseau sent this essay to Voltaire, who replied ( 1755): "I have received your new book against 
the human race, and thank you for it. Never was such a cleverness used in the design of making us 
all stupid. One longs, in reading your book, to walk on all fours. But as I have lost that habit for 
more than sixty years, I feel unhappily the impossibility of resuming it. Nor can I embark in search 
of the savages of Canada, because the maladies to which I am condemned render a European 
surgeon necessary to me; because war is going on in those regions; and because the example of 
our actions has made the savages nearly as bad as ourselves." 

It is not surprising that Rousseau and Voltaire ultimately quarrelled; the marvel is that they did not 
quarrel sooner. 

In 1754, having become famous, he was remembered by his native city, and invited to visit it. He 
accepted, but as only Calvinists could be citizens of Geneva, he had himself reconverted to his 
original faith. He had already adopted the practice of speaking of himself as a 


- 688 - 



Genevan puritan and republican, and after his reconversion he thought of living in Geneva. He 
dedicated his Discourse on Inequality to the City Fathers, but they were not pleased; they had no 
wish to be considered only the equals of ordinary citizens. Their opposition was not the only 
drawback to life in Geneva; there was another, even more grave, and this was that Voltaire had 
gone to live there. Voltaire was a writer of plays and an enthusiast for the theatre, but Geneva, on 
Puritan grounds, forbade all dramatic representations. When Voltaire tried to get the ban removed, 
Rousseau entered the lists on the Puritan side. Savages never act plays; Plato disapproves of them; 
the Catholic Church refuses to marry or bury actors; Bossuet calls the drama a "school of 
concupiscence." The opportunity for an attack on Voltaire was too good to be lost, and Rousseau 
made himself the champion of ascetic virtue. 

This was not the first public disagreement of these two eminent men. The first was occasioned by 
the earthquake of Lisbon ( 1755), about which Voltaire wrote a poem throwing doubt on the 
Providential government of the world. Rousseau was indignant. He commented: " Voltaire, in 
seeming always to believe in God, never really believed in anybody but the devil, since his 
pretended God is a maleficent Being who according to him finds all his pleasure in working 
mischief. The absurdity of this doctrine is especially revolting in a man crowned with good things 
of every sort, and who from the midst of his own happiness tries to fill his fellow-creatures with 
despair, by the cruel and terrible image of the serious calamities from which he is himself free." 

Rousseau, for his part, saw no occasion to make such a fuss about the earthquake. It is quite a 
good thing that a certain number of people should get killed now and then. Besides, the people of 
Lisbon suffered because they lived in houses seven stories high; if they had been dispersed in the 
woods, as people ought to be, they would have escaped uninjured. 

The questions of the theology of earthquakes and of the morality of stage plays caused a bitter 
enmity between Voltaire and Rousseau, in which all the philosophes took sides. Voltaire treated 
Rousseau as a mischievous madman; Rousseau spoke of Voltaire as "that trumpet of impiety, that 
fine genius, and that low soul." Fine sentiments, however, must find expression, and Rousseau 
wrote to Voltaire 


- 689 - 



( 1760): "I hate you, in fact, since you have so willed it; but I hate you like a man still worthier 
to have loved you, if you had willed it. Of all the sentiments with which my heart was full 
towards you, there only remain the admiration that we cannot refuse to your fine genius, and 
love for your writings. If there is nothing in you that I can honour but your talents, that is no 
fault of mine." 

We come now to the most fruitful period of Rousseau's life. His novel La nouvelle HA©loA se 
appeared in 1760; Emile and The Social Contract both in 1762. Emile, which is a treatise on 
education according to "natural" principles, might have been considered harmless by the 
authorities if it had not contained "The Confession of Faith of a Savoyard Vicar," which set 
forth the principles of natural religion as understood by Rousseau, and was irritating to both 
Catholic and Protestant orthodoxy. The Social Contract was even more dangerous, for it 
advocated democracy and denied the divine right of kings. The two books, while they greatly 
increased his fame, brought upon him a storm of official condemnation. He was obliged to fly 
from France; Geneva would have none of him f_; Bern refused him asylum. At last Frederick 
the Great took pity on him, and allowed him to live at Motiers, near Neuchatel, which was part 
of the philosopher-king's dominions. There he lived for three years; but at the end of that time 
( 1765) the villagers of Motiers, led by the pastor, accused him of poisoning, and tried to 
murder him. He fled to England, where Hume, in 1762, had proffered his services. 

In England, at first, all went well. He had a great social success, and George III granted him a 
pension. He saw Burke almost daily, but their friendship soon cooled to the point where Burke 
said: "He entertained no principle, either to influence his heart, or guide his understanding, but 
vanity." Hume was longest faithful, saying he loved him much, and could live with him all his 
life in mutual friendship and esteem. But by this time Rousseau, not unnaturally, had come to 
suffer from the persecution mania which ultimately drove him insane, and he suspected Hume 
of being the agent of plots against his life. At moments he would realize the absurdity of such 
suspicions, 


* The Council of Geneva ordered the two books burnt, and gave instructions that Rousseau 
was to be arrested if he came to Geneva. The French Government had ordered his arrest; 
the Sorbonne and the Parlement of Paris condemned Emile. 


- 690 - 


and would embrace Hume, exclaiming "No, no, Hume is no traitor," to which Hume (no doubt 
much embarrassed) replied, " Quoi , mon cher MonsieurV' But in the end his delusions won the 
day and he fled. His last years were spent in Paris in great poverty, and when he died suicide 
was suspected. 

After the breach, Hume said: "He has only felt during the whole course of his life, and in this 
respect his sensibility rises to a pitch beyond what I have seen any example of; but it still gives 
him a more acute feeling of pain than of pleasure. He is like a man who was stripped not only of 
his clothes, but of his skin, and turned out in this situation to combat with the rude and 
boisterous elements." 

This is the kindest summary of his character that is in any degree compatible with truth. 

There is much in Rousseau's work which, however important in other respects, does not 
concern the history of philosophical thought. There are only two parts of his thinking that I shall 
consider in any detail; these are, first, his theology, and second, his political theory. 

In theology he made an innovation which has now been accepted by the great majority of 
Protestant theologians. Before him, every philosopher from Plato onwards, if he believed in 
God, offered intellectual arguments in favour of his belief. jyThc arguments may not, to us, 
seem very convincing, and we may feel that they would not have seemed cogent to anyone who 
did not already feel sure of the truth of the conclusion. But the philosopher who advanced the 
arguments certainly believed them to be logically valid, and such as should cause certainty of 
God's existence in any unprejudiced person of sufficient philosophical capacity. Modem 
Protestants who urge us to believe in God, for the most part, despise the old "proofs," and base 
their faith upon some aspect of human nature— emotions of awe or mystery, the sense of right 
and wrong, the feeling of aspiration, and so on. This way of defending religious belief was 
invented by Rousseau. It has become so familiar that his originality may easily not be 
appreciated by a modern reader, unless he will take the trouble to compare Rousseau with (say) 
Descartes or Leibniz. 

"Ah, Madame!" Rousseau writes to an aristocratic lady, "sometimes in the privacy of my study, 
with my hands pressed tight over 


* We must except Pascal. "The heart has its reasons, of which reason is ignorant" is quite in 
Rousseau's style. 


- 691 - 


my eyes or in the darkness of the night, I am of opinion that there is no God. But look yonder: 
the rising of the sun, as it scatters the mists that cover the earth, and lays bare the wondrous 
glittering scene of nature, disperses at the same moment all cloud from my soul. I find my faith 
again, and my God, and my belief in Him. I admire and adore Him, and I prostrate myself in His 
presence." 

On another occasion he says: "I believe in God as strongly as I believe any other truth, because 
believing and not believing are the last things in the world that depend on me." This fonn of 
argument has the drawback of being private; the fact that Rousseau cannot help believing 
something affords no ground for another person to believe the same thing. 

He was very emphatic in his theism. On one occasion he threatened to leave a dinner party 
because Saint Lambert (one of the guests) expressed a doubt as to the existence of God. "Moi, 
Monsieur," Rousseau exclaimed angrily, "je crois en Dieu!" Robespierre, in all things his 
faithful disciple, followed him in this respect also. The "FA"te de I'Etre SuprA a me" would have 
had Rousseau's whole-hearted approval. 

"The Confession of Faith of a Savoyard Vicar," which is an interlude in the fourth book of 
Emile, is the most explicit and fonnal statement of Rousseau's creed. Although it professes to 
be what the voice of nature has proclaimed to a virtuous priest, who suffers disgrace for the 
wholly "natural" fault of seducing an unmarried woman ^_the reader finds with surprise that the 
voice of nature, when it begins to speak, is uttering a hotch-pot of arguments derived from 
Aristotle, Saint Augustine, Descartes, and so on. It is true that they are robbed of precision and 
logical form; this is supposed to excuse them, and to permit the worthy Vicar to say that he 
cares nothing for the wisdom of the philosophers. 

The later parts of "The Confession of Faith" are less reminiscent of previous thinkers than the 
earlier parts. After satisfying himself that there is a God, the Vicar goes on to consider rules of 
conduct. "I do not deduce these rules," he says, "from the principles of a high philosophy, but I 
find them in the depths of my heart, written by Nature in ineffaceable characters." From this he 
goes on to develop the view that conscience is in all circumstances an infallible guide to 


* "Un prA Are en bonne rA'gle tie doit faire des enfants qu'aux femmes mariA ©es, " he 
elsewhere reports a Savoyard priest as saying. 


- 692 - 


right action. "Thanks be to Heaven," he concludes this part of his argument, "we are thus freed 
from all this terrifying apparatus of philosophy; we can be men without being learned; dispensed 
from wasting our life in the study of morals, we have at less cost a more assured guide in this 
immense labyrinth of human opinions." Our natural feelings, he contends, lead us to serve the 
common interest, while our reason urges selfishness. We have therefore only to follow feeling 
rather than reason in order to be virtuous. 

Natural religion, as the Vicar calls his doctrine, has no need of a revelation; if men had listened to 
what God says to the heart, there would have been only one religion in the world. If God has 
revealed Himself specially to certain men, this can only be kn own by human testimony, which is 
fallible. Natural religion has the advantage of being revealed directly to each individual. 

There is a curious passage about hell. The Vicar does not know whether the wicked go to eternal 
torment, and says, somewhat loftily, that the fate of the wicked does not greatly interest him; but 
on the whole he inclines to the view that the pains of hell are not everlasting. However this may 
be, he is sure that salvation is not confined to the members of any one Church. 

It was presumably the rejection of revelation and of hell that so profoundly shocked the French 
government and the Council of Geneva. 

The rejection of reason in favour of the heart was not, to my mind, an advance. In fact, no one 
thought of this device so long as reason appeared to be on the side of religious belief. In 
Rousseau's environment, reason, as represented by Voltaire, was opposed to religion, therefore 
away with reason! Moreover reason was abstruse and difficult; the savage, even when he has 
dined, cannot understand the ontological argument, and yet the savage is the repository of all 
necessary wisdom. Rousseau's savage— who was not the savage known to anthropologists— was a 
good husband and a kind father; he was destitute of greed, and had a religion of natural kindliness. 
He was a convenient person, but if he could follow the good Vicar's reasons for believing in God 
he must have had more philosophy than his innocent naA vetA© would lead one to expect. 

Apart from the fictitious character of Rousseau's "natural man," there are two objections to the 
practice of basing beliefs as to ob- 


- 693 - 



jective fact upon the emotions of the heart. One is that there is no reason whatever to suppose that 
such beliefs will be true; the other is, that the resulting beliefs will be private, since the heart says 
dif- 


ferent things to different people. Some savages are persuaded by the "natural light" that it is their 
duty to eat people, and even Voltaire's savages, who are led by the voice of reason to hold that one 
should only eat Jesuits, are not wholly satisfactory. To Buddhists, the light of nature does not 
reveal the existence of God, but does proclaim that it is wrong to eat the flesh of animals. But 
even if the heart said the same thing to all men, that could afford no evidence for the existence of 
anything outside our own emotions. However ardently I, or all mankind, may desire something, 
however necessary it may be to human happiness, that is no ground for supposing this something 
to exist. There is no law of nature guaranteeing that mankind should be happy. Everybody can see 
that this is true of our life here on earth, but by a curious twist our very sufferings in this life are 
made into an argument for a better life hereafter. We should not employ such an argument in any 
other connection. If you had bought ten dozen eggs from a man, and the first dozen were all 
rotten, you would not infer that the remaining nine dozen must be of surpassing excellence; yet 
that is the kind of reasoning that "the heart" encourages as a consolation for our sufferings here 
below. 

For my part, I prefer the ontological argument, the cosmological argument, and the rest of the old 
stock-in-trade, to the sentimental illogicality that has sprung from Rousseau. The old arguments at 
least were honest: if valid, they proved their point; if invalid, it was open to any critic to prove 
them so. But the new theology of the heart dispenses with argument; it cannot be refuted, because 
it does not profess to prove its points. At bottom, the only reason offered for its acceptance is that 
it allows us to indulge in pleasant dreams. This is an unworthy reason, and if I had to choose 
between Thomas Aquinas and Rousseau, I should unhesitatingly choose the Saint. 

Rousseau political theory is set forth in his Social Contract, published in 1762. This book is very 
different in character from most of his writing; it contains little sentimentality and much close 
intellectual reasoning. Its doctrines, though they pay lip-service to democracy, tend to the 
justification of the totalitarian State. But Geneva and antiquity combined to make him prefer the 
City State to large empires 


- 694 - 



such as those of France and England. On the title-page he calls himself "citizen of Geneva," and in 
his introductory sentences he says: "As I was bom a citizen of a free State, and a member of the 
Sovereign, I feel that, however feeble the influence of my voice may have been on public affairs, 
the right of voting on them makes it my duty to study them." There are frequent laudatory 
references to Sparta, as it appears in Plutarch Life of Lycurgus. He says that democracy is best in 
small States, aristocracy in middle-sized ones, and monarchy in large ones. But it is to be 
understood that, in his opinion, small States are preferable, in part because they make democracy 
more practicable. When he speaks of democracy, he means, as the Greeks meant, direct 
participation of every citizen; representative government he calls elective aristocracy." Since the 
former is not possible in a large State, his praise of democracy always implies praise of the City 
State. This love of the City State is, in my opinion, not sufficiently emphasized in most accounts 
of Rousseau's political philosophy. 

Although the book as a whole is much less rhetorical than most of Rousseau's writing, the first 
chapter opens with a very forceful piece of rhetoric: "Man is born free, and everywhere he is in 
chains. One man thinks himself the master of others, but remains more of a slave than they are." 
Liberty is the nominal goal of Rousseau's thought, but in fact it is equality that he values, and that 
he seeks to secure even at the expense of liberty. 

His conception of the Social Contract seems, at first, analogous to Locke's, but soon shows itself 
more akin to that of Hobbes. In the development from the state of nature, there comes a time when 
individuals can no longer maintain themselves in primitive independence; it then becomes 
necessary to self-preservation that they should unite to form a society. But how can I pledge my 
liberty without hanning my interests? "The problem is to find a form of association which will 
defend and protect with the whole common force the person and goods of each associate, and in 
which each, while uniting himself with all, may still obey himself alone, and remain as free as 
before. This is the fundamental problem of which the Social Contract provides the solution." 

The Contract consists in "the total alienation of each associate, together with all his rights, to the 
whole community; for, in the first place, as each gives himself absolutely, the conditions are the 
same 


- 695 - 



for all; and this being so, no one has any interest in making them burdensome to others." The 
alienation is to be without reserve: "If individuals retained certain rights, as there would be no 
common superior to decide between them and the public, each, being on one point his own judge, 
would ask to be so on all; the state of nature would thus continue, and the association would 
necessarily become inoperative or tyrannical." 

This implies a complete abrogation of liberty and a complete rejection of the doctrine of the rights 
of man. It is true that, in a later chapter, there is some softening of this theory. It is there said that, 
although the social contract gives the body politic absolute power over all its members, 
nevertheless human beings have natural rights as men. "The sovereign cannot impose upon its 
subjects any fetters that are useless to the community, nor can it even wish to do so." But the 
sovereign is the sole judge of what is useful or useless to the community. It is clear that only a 
very feeble obstacle is thus opposed to collective tyranny. 

It should be observed that the "sovereign" means, in Rousseau, not the monarch or the 
government, but the community in its collective and legislative capacity. 

The Social Contract Pan be stated in the following words: "Each of us puts his person and all his 
power in common under the supreme direction of the general will, and, in our corporate capacity, 
we receive each member as an indivisible part of the whole." This act of association creates a 
moral and collective body, which is called the "State" when passive, the "Sovereign" when active, 
and a "Power" in relation to other bodies like itself. 

The conception of the "general will," which appears in the above wording of the Contract, plays a 
very important part in Rousseau's system. I shall have more to say about it shortly. 

It is argued that the Sovereign need give no guarantees to its subjects, for, since it is formed of the 
individuals who compose it, it can have no interest contrary to theirs. "The Sovereign, merely by 
virtue of what it is, is always what it should be." This doctrine is misleading to the reader who 
does not note Rousseau's somewhat peculiar use of terms. The Sovereign is not the government, 
which, it is admitted, may be tyrannical; the Sovereign is a more or less metaphysical entity, not 
fully embodied in any of the visible organs of the State. Its im- 


- 696 - 



peccability, therefore, even if admitted, has not the practical consequences that it might be 
supposed to have. 

The will of the Sovereign, which is always right, is the "general will." Each citizen, qud citizen, 
shares in the general will, but he may also, as an individual, have a particular will running counter 
to the general will. The Social Contract involves that whoever refuses to obey the general will 
shall be forced to do so. "This means nothing less than that he will be forced to be free." 

This conception of being "forced to be free" is very metaphysical. The general will in the time of 
Galileo was certainly anti-Copemican; was Galileo "forced to be free" when the Inquisition 
compelled him to recant? Is even a malefactor "forced to be free" when he is put in prison? Think 
of Byron's Corsair: 

O’er the glad waters of the deep blue sea, Our thoughts as boundless and our hearts as free. 

Would this man be more "free" in a dungeon? The odd thing is that Byron's noble pirates are a 
direct outcome of Rousseau, and yet, in the above passage, Rousseau forgets his romanticism and 
speaks like a sophistical policeman. Hegel, who owed much to Rousseau, adopted his misuse of 
the word "freedom," and defined it as the right to obey the police, or something not very different. 

Rousseau has not that profound respect for private property that characterizes Locke and his 
disciples. "The State, in relation to its members, is master of all their goods." Nor does he believe 
in division of powers, as preached by Locke and Montesquieu. In this respect, however, as in 
some others, his later detailed discussions do not wholly agree with his earlier general principles. 
In Book III, Chapter I, he says that the part of the Sovereign is limited to making laws, and that the 
executive, or government, is an intennediate body set up between the subjects and the Sovereign 
to secure their mutual correspondence. He goes on to say: "If the Sovereign desires to govern, or 
the magistrate to give laws, or if the subjects refuse to obey, disorder takes the place of regularity, 
and . . . the State falls into despotism or anarchy." In this sentence, allowing for the difference of 
vocabulary, he seems to agree with Montesquieu. 

I come now to the doctrine of the general will, which is both im- 


- 697 - 



portant and obscure. The general will is not identical with the will of the majority, or even with 
the will of all the citizens. It seems to be conceived as the will belonging to the body politic as 
such. If we take Hobbes's view, that a civil society is a person, we must suppose it endowed with 
the attributes of personality, including will. But then we are faced with the difficulty of deciding 
what are the visible manifestations of this will, and here Rousseau leaves us in the dark. We are 
told that the general will is always right and always tends to the public advantage; but that it does 
not follow that the deliberations of the people are equally correct, for there is often a great deal of 
difference between the will of all and the general will. How, then, are we to know what is the 
general will? There is, in the same chapter, a sort of answer: 

"If, when the people, being furnished with adequate infonnation, held its deliberations, the 
citizens had no communication one with another, the grand total of the small differences would 
always give the general will, and the decision would always be good." 

The conception in Rousseau's mind seems to be this: every man's political opinion is governed by 
self-interest, but self-interest consists of two parts, one of which is peculiar to the individual, 
while the other is common to all the members of the community. If the citizens have no 
opportunity of striking log-rolling bargains with each other, their individual interests, being 
divergent, will cancel out, and there will be left a resultant which will represent their common 
interest; this resultant is the general will. Perhaps Rousseau's conception might be illustrated by 
terrestrial gravitation. Every particle in the earth attracts every other particle in the universe 
towards itself; the air above us attracts us upward while the ground beneath us attracts us 
downward. But all these "selfish" attractions cancel each other out in so far as they are divergent, 
and what remains is a resultant attraction towards the centre of the earth. This might be fancifully 
conceived as the act of the earth considered as a community, and as the expression of its general 
will. 

To say that the general will is always right is only to say that, since it represents what is in 
common among the self-interests of the various citizens, it must represent the largest collective 
satisfaction of selfinterest possible to the community. This interpretation of Rousseau's 


- 698 - 



meaning seems to accord with his words better than any other that I have been able to think of. 

* 

In Rousseau's opinion, what interferes in practice with the expression of the general will is the 
existence of subordinate associations within the State. Each of these will have its own general 
will, which may conflict with that of the community as a whole. "It may then be said that there 
are no longer as many votes as there are men, but only as many as there are associations." This 
leads to an important consequence: "It is therefore essential, if the general will is to be able to 
express itself, that there should be no partial society within the State, and that each citizen 
should think only his own thoughts: which was indeed the sublime and unique system 
established by the great Lycurgus." In a footnote, Rousseau supports his opinion with the 
authority of Machiavelli. 

Consider what such a system would involve in practice. The State would have to prohibit 
churches (except a State Church), political parties, trade-unions, and all other organizations of 
men with similar economic interests. The result is obviously the Corporate or Totalitarian State, 
in which the individual citizen is powerless. Rousseau seems to realize that it may be difficult 
to prohibit all associations, and adds, as an afterthought, that, if there must be subordinate 
associations, then the more there are the better, in order that they may neutralize each other. 

When, in a later part of the book, he comes to consider government, he realizes that the 
executive is inevitably an association having an interest and a general will of its own, which 
may easily conflict with that of the community. He says that while the government of a large 
State needs to be stronger than that of a small one, there is also more need of restraining the 
government by means of the Sovereign. A member of the government has three wills: his 
personal will, the will of the government, and the general will. These three should fonn a 
crescendo, but usually in fact form a diminuendo . Again: "Everything conspires to take away 
from a man who is set in authority over others the sense of justice and reason." 


* E.g., "There is often much difference between the will of all and the general will; the latter 
considers only the common interest; the former looks to private interest, and is only a sum 
of particular wills; but take away from these same wills the more and the less which 
destroy each other, and the general will remains as the sum of the differences." 


- 699 - 


Thus in spite of the infallibility of the general will, which is "always constant, unalterable, and 
pure," all the old problems of eluding tyranny remain. What Rousseau has to say on these 
problems is either a surreptitious repetition of Montesquieu, or an insistence on the supremacy of 
the legislature, which, if democratic, is identical with what he calls the Sovereign. The broad 
general principles with which he starts, and which he presents as if they solved political problems, 
disappear when he condescends to detailed considerations, towards the solution of which they 
contribute nothing. 

The condemnation of the book by contemporary reactionaries leads a modem reader to expect to 
find in it a much more sweeping revolutionary doctrine than it in fact contains. We may illustrate 
this by what is said about democracy. When Rousseau uses this word, he means, as we have 
already seen, the direct democracy of the ancient City State. This, he points out, can never be 
completely realized, because the people cannot be always assembled and always occupied with 
public affairs. "Were there a people of gods, their government would be democratic. So perfect a 
government is not for men." 

What we call democracy he calls elective aristocracy; this, he says, is the best of all governments, 
but it is not suitable to all countries. The climate must be neither very hot nor very cold; the 
produce must not much exceed what is necessary, for, where it does, the evil of luxury is 
inevitable, and it is better that this evil should be confined to a monarch and his Court than 
diffused throughout the population. In virtue of these limitations, a large field is left for despotic 
government. Nevertheless his advocacy of democracy, in spite of its limitations, was no doubt one 
of the things that made the French government implacably hostile to the book; the other, 
presumably, was the rejection of the divine right of kings, which is implied in the doctrine of the 
Social Contract as the origin of government. 

The Social Contract became the Bible of most of the leaders in the French Revolution, but no 
doubt, as is the fate of Bibles, it was not carefully read and was still less understood by many of its 
disciples. It reintroduced the habit of metaphysical abstractions among the theorists of democracy, 
and by its doctrine of the general will it made possible the mystic identification of a leader with 
his people, which has no need of confirmation by so mundane an apparatus as the ballot-box. 


- 700 - 



Much of its philosophy could be appropriated by Hegel f_in his defence of the Prussian 
autocracy. Its first-fruits in practice was the reign of Robespierre; the dictatorships of Russia 
and Germany (especially the latter) are in part an outcome of Rousseau's teaching. What further 
triumphs the future has to offer to his ghost I do not venture to predict. 

CHAPTER XX Kant 
A. GERMAN IDEALISM IN GENERAL 

PHILOSOPHY in the eighteenth century was dominated by the British empiricists, of whom 
Locke, Berkeley, and Hume may be taken as the representatives. In these men there was a 
conflict, of which they themselves appear to have been unaware, between their temper of mind 
and the tendency of their theoretical doctrines. In their temper of mind they were socially 
minded citizens, by no means self-assertive, not unduly anxious for power, and in favour of a 
tolerant world where, within the limits of the criminal law, every man could do as he pleased. 
They were good-natured, men of the world, urbane and kindly. 

But while their temper was social, their theoretical philosophy led to subjectivism. This was not 
a new tendency; it had existed in late antiquity, most emphatically in Saint Augustine; it was 
revived in modern times by Descartes's cogito, and reached a momentary culmination in 
Leibniz's windowless monads. Leibniz believed that everything in his experience would be 
unchanged if the rest of the world were annihilated; nevertheless he devoted himself to the 
reunion of 


* Hegel selects for special praise the distinction between the general will and the will of all. 
He says: " Rousseau would have made a sounder contribution towards a theory of the 
State, if he had always kept this distinction in sight" (Logic, Sec. 163). 


- 701 - 


the Catholic and Protestant Churches. A similar inconsistency appears in Locke, Berkeley, and 
Hume. 

In Locke, the inconsistency is still in the theory. We saw in an earlier chapter that Locke says, on 
the one hand: "Since the mind, in all its thoughts and reasonings, hath no other immediate object 
but its own ideas, which it alone does or can contemplate, it is evident that our knowledge is only 
conversant about them." And: "Knowledge is the perception of the agreement or disagreement of 
two ideas." Nevertheless, he maintains that we have three kinds of knowledge of real existence: 
intuitive, of our own; demonstrative, of God's; and sensitive, of things present to sense. Simple 
ideas, he maintains, are "the product of things operating on the mind in a natural way." How he 
knows this, he does not explain; it certainly goes beyond "the agreement or disagreement of two 
ideas." 

Berkeley took an important step towards ending this inconsistency. For him, there are only minds 
and their ideas; the physical external world is abolished. But he still failed to grasp all the 
consequences of the epistemological principles that he took over from Locke. If he had been 
completely consistent, he would have denied knowledge of God and of all minds except his own. 
From such denial he was held back by his feelings as a clergyman and as a social being. 

Hume shrank from nothing in pursuit of theoretical consistency, but felt no impulse to make his 
practice conform to his theory. Hume denied the Self, and threw doubt on induction and 
causation. He accepted Berkeley's abolition of matter, but not the substitute that Berkeley offered 
in the form of God's ideas. It is true that, like Locke, he admitted no simple idea without an 
antecedent impression, and no doubt he imagined an "impression" as a state of mind directly 
caused by something external to the mind. But he could not admit this as a definition of 
"impression," since he questioned the notion of "cause." I doubt whether either he or his disciples 
were ever clearly aware of this problem as to impressions. Obviously, on his view, an 
"impression" would have to be defined by some intrinsic character distinguishing it from an 
"idea," since it could not be defined causally. He could not therefore argue that impressions give 
knowledge of things external to ourselves, as had been done by Locke, and, in a modified form, by 
Berkeley. He should, therefore, have believed him- 


- 702 - 



self shut up in a solipsistic world, and ignorant of everything except his own mental states and 
their relations. 

Hume, by his consistency, showed that empiricism, carried to its logical conclusion, led to results 
which few human beings could bring themselves to accept, and abolished, over the whole field of 
science, the distinction between rational belief and credulity. Locke had foreseen this danger. He 
puts into the mouth of a supposed critic the argument: "If knowledge consists in agreement of 
ideas, the enthusiast and the sober man are on a level." Locke, living at a time when men had 
grown tired of "enthusiasm," found no difficulty in persuading men of the validity of his reply to 
this criticism. Rousseau, coming at a moment when people were, in turn, getting tired of reason, 
revived "enthusiasm," and, accepting the bankruptcy of reason, allowed the heart to decide 
questions which the head left doubtful. From 1750 to 1794, the heart spoke louder and louder; at 
last Thermidor put an end, for a time, to its ferocious pronouncements, so far at least as France 
was concerned. Under Napoleon, heart and head were alike silenced. 

In Gennany, the reaction against Hume's agnosticism took a form far more profound and subtle 
than that which Rousseau had given to it. Kant, Fichte, and Hegel developed a new kind of 
philosophy, intended to safeguard both knowledge and virtue from the subversive doctrines of the 
late eighteenth century. In Kant, and still more in Fichte, the subjectivist tendency that begins with 
Descartes was carried to new extremes; in this respect, there was at first no reaction against Hume. 
As regards subjectivism, the reaction began with Hegel, who sought, through his logic, to 
establish a new way of escape from the individual into the world. 

The whole of German idealism has affinities with the romantic movement. These are obvious in 
Fichte, and still more so in Schelling; they are least so in Hegel. 

Kant, the founder of German idealism, is not himself politically important, though he wrote some 
interesting essays on political subjects. Fichte and Hegel, on the other hand, both set forth political 
doctrines which had, and still have, a profound influence upon the course of history. Neither can 
be understood without a previous study of Kant, whom we shall consider in this chapter. 


- 703 - 



There are certain common characteristics of the German idealists, which can be mentioned before 
embarking upon detail. 

The critique of knowledge, as a means of reaching philosophical conclusions, is emphasized by 
Kant and accepted by his followers. There is an emphasis upon mind as opposed to matter, which 
leads in the end to the assertion that only mind exists. There is a vehement rejection of utilitarian 
ethics in favour of systems which are held to be demonstrated by abstract philosophical 
arguments. There is a scholastic tone which is absent in the earlier French and English 
philosophers; Kant, Fichte, and Hegel were university professors, addressing learned audiences, 
not gentlemen of leisure addressing amateurs. Although their effects were in part revolutionary, 
they themselves were not intentionally subversive; Fichte and Hegel were very definitely 
concerned in the defence of the State. The lives of all of them were exemplary and academic; their 
views on moral questions were strictly orthodox. They made innovations in theology, but they did 
so in the interests of religion. 

With these preliminary remarks, let us turn to the study of Kant. 

B. OUTLINE OF KANT'S PHILOSOPHY 

Immanuel Kant ( 1724-1804) is generally considered the greatest of modern philosophers. I cannot 
myself agree with this estimate, but it would be foolish not to recognize his great importance. 

Throughout his whole life, Kant lived in or near KA]|nigsberg, in East Prussia. His outer life was 
academic and wholly uneventful, although he lived through the Seven Years’ War (during part of 
which the Russians occupied East Prussia), the French Revolution, and the early part of 
Napoleon's career. He was educated in the Wolfian version of Leibniz's philosophy, but was led to 
abandon it by two influences: Rousseau and Hume. Hume, by his criticism of the concept of 
causality, awakened him from his dogmatic slumbers— so at least he says, but the awakening was 
only temporary, and he soon invented a soporific which enabled him to sleep again. Hume, for 
Kant, was an adversary to be refuted, but the influence of Rousseau was more profound. Kant was 
a man of such regular habits that people used to set their watches by him as he passed their doors 
on his con- 


- 704 - 



stitutional, but on one occasion his time-table was disrupted for several days; this was when he 
was reading Emile. He said that he had to read Rousseau's books several times, because, at a first 
reading, the beauty of the style prevented him from noticing the matter. Although he had been 
brought up as a pietist, he was a Liberal both in politics and in theology; he sympathized with the 
French Revolution until the Reign of Terror, and was a believer in democracy. His philosophy, as 
we shall see, allowed an appeal to the heart against the cold dictates of theoretical reason, which 
might, with a little exaggeration, be regarded as a pedantic version of the Savoyard Vicar. His 
principle that every man is to be regarded as an end in himself is a form of the doctrine of the 
Rights of Man; and his love of freedom is shown in his saying (about children as well as adults) 
that "there can be nothing more dreadful than that the actions of a man should be subject to the 
will of another." 

Kant's early works are more concerned with science than with philosophy. After the earthquake of 
Lisbon he wrote on the theory of earthquakes; he wrote a treatise on wind, and a short essay on the 
question whether the west wind in Europe is moist because it has crossed the Atlantic Ocean. 
Physical geography was a subject in which he took great interest. 

The most important of his scientific writings is his General Natural History and Theory of the 
Heavens ( 1755), which anticipates Laplace's nebular hypothesis, and sets forth a possible origin 
of the solar system. Parts of this work have a remarkable Miltonic sublimity. It has the merit of 
inventing what proved a fruitful hypothesis, but it does not, as Laplace did, advance serious 
arguments in its favour. In parts it is purely fanciful, for instance in the doctrine that all planets are 
inhabited, and that the most distant planets have the best inhabitants— a view to be praised for its 
terrestrial modesty, but not supported by any scientific grounds. 

At a time when he was more troubled by the arguments of sceptics than he was earlier or later, he 
wrote a curious work called Dreams of a Ghost-seer, Illustrated by the Dreams of Metaphysics 
( 1766). The "ghost-seer" is Swedenborg, whose mystical system had been presented to the world 
in an enonnous work, of which four copies were sold, three to unknown purchasers and one to 
Kant. Kant, half seriously and half in jest, suggests that Swedenborg's system, which 


- 705 - 



he calls "fantastic," is perhaps no more so than orthodox metaphysics. He is not, however, wholly 
contemptuous of Swedenborg. His mystical side, which existed though it did not much appear in 
his writings, admired Swedenborg, whom he calls "very sublime." 

Like everybody else at that time, he wrote a treatise on the sublime and the beautiful. Night is 
sublime, day is beautiful; the sea is sublime, the land is beautiful; man is sublime, woman is 
beautiful; and so on. 

The Encyclopedia Britannica remarks that "as he never married, he kept the habits of his studious 
youth to old age." I wonder whether the author of this article was a bachelor or a married man. 

Kant most important book is The Critique of Pure Reason. (1st edition 1781; 2nd edition 1787.) 
The purpose of this work is to prove that, although none of our knowledge can transcend 
experience, it is nevertheless in part a priori and not inferred inductively from experience. The 
part of our knowledge which is a priori embraces, according to him, not only logic, but much that 
cannot be included in logic or deduced from it. He separates two distinctions which, in Leibniz, 
are confounded. On the one hand there is the distinction between "analytic" and "synthetic" 
propositions; on the other hand, the distinction between "a priori " and "empirical" propositions. 
Something must be said about each of these distinctions. 

An "analytic" proposition is one in which the predicate is part of the subject; for instance, "a tall 
man is a man," or "an equilateral triangle is a triangle." Such propositions follow from the law of 
contradiction; to maintain that a tall man is not a man would be selfcontradictory. A "synthetic" 
proposition is one that is not analytic. All the propositions that we know only through experience 
are synthetic. We cannot, by a mere analysis of concepts, discover such truths as "Tuesday was a 
wet day" or "Napoleon was a great general." But Kant, unlike Leibniz and all other previous 
philosophers, will not admit the converse, that all synthetic propositions are only known through 
experience. This brings us to the second of the above distinctions. 

An "empirical" proposition is one which we cannot kn ow except by the help of sense-perception, 
either our own or that of some one else whose testimony we accept. The facts of history and 
geography are of this sort; so are the laws of science, whenever our knowledge of their truth 
depends on observational data. An "a priori" proposi- 


- 706 - 



tion, on the other hand, is one which, though it may be elicited by experience, is seen, when 
known, to have a basis other than experience. A child learning arithmetic may be helped by 
experiencing two marbles and two other marbles, and observing that altogether he is experiencing 
four marbles. But when he has grasped the general proposition "two and two are four" he no 
longer requires confirmation by instances; the proposition has a certainty which induction can 
never give to a general law. All the propositions of pure mathematics are in this sense a priori. 

Hume had proved that the law of causality is not analytic, and had inferred that we could not be 
certain of its truth. Kant accepted the view that it is synthetic, but nevertheless maintained that it is 
known a priori. He maintained that arithmetic and geometry are synthetic, but are likewise a 
priori. He was thus led to formulate his problem in these terms: 

How are synthetic judgements a priori possible? 

The answer to this question, with its consequences, constitutes the main theme of The Critique of 
Pure Reason. 

Kant's solution of the problem was one in which he felt great confidence. He had spent twelve 
years in looking for it, but took only a few months to write his whole long book after his theory 
had taken shape. In the preface to the first edition he says: "I venture to assert that there is not a 
single metaphysical problem which has not been solved, or for the solution of which the key at 
least has not been supplied." In the preface to the second edition he compares himself to 
Copernicus, and says that he has effected a Copernican revolution in philosophy. 

According to Kant, the outer world causes only the matter of sensation, but our own mental 
apparatus orders this matter in space and time, and supplies the concepts by means of which we 
understand experience. Things in themselves, which are the causes of our sensations, are 
unknowable; they are not in space or time, they are not substances, nor can they be described by 
any of those other general concepts which Kant calls "categories." Space and time are subjective, 
they are part of our apparatus of perception. But just because of this, we can be sure that whatever 
we experience will exhibit the characteristics dealt with by geometry and the science of time. If 
you always wore blue spectacles, you could be sure of seeing everything blue 


- 707 - 



(this is not Kant's illustration). Similarly, since you always wear spatial spectacles in your mind, 
you are sure of always seeing everything in space. Thus geometry is a priori in the sense that it 
must be true of everything experienced, but we have no reason to suppose that anything analogous 
is true of things in themselves, which we do not experience. 

Space and time, Kant says, are not concepts; they are fonns of "intuition." (The Gennan word is 
" Anschauung ," which means literally "looking at" or "view." The word "intuition," though the 
accepted translation is not altogether a satisfactory one.) There are also, however, a priori 
concepts; these are the twelve "categories," which Kant derives from the forms of the syllogism. 
The twelve categories are divided into four sets of three: (1) of quantity: unity, plurality, totality; 
(2) of quality: reality, negation, limitation; (3) of relation: substance-and-accident, cause-and- 
effect, reciprocity; (4) of modality: possibility, existence, necessity. These are subjective in the 
same sense in which space and time are— that is to say, our mental constitution is such that they 
are applicable to whatever we experience, but there is no reason to suppose them applicable to 
things in themselves. As regards cause, however, there is an inconsistency, for things in 
themselves are regarded by Kant as causes of sensations, and free volitions are held by him to be 
causes of occurrences in space and time. This inconsistency is not an accidental oversight; it is an 
essential part of his system. 

A large part of The Critique of Pure Reason is occupied in showing the fallacies that arise from 
applying space and time or the categories to things that are not experienced. When this is done, so 
Kant maintains, we find ourselves troubled by "antinomies"— that is to say, by mutually 
contradictory propositions each of which can apparently be proved. Kant gives four such 
antinomies, each consisting of thesis and antithesis. 

In the first, the thesis says: "The world has a beginning in time, and is also limited as regards 
space." The antithesis says: "The world has no beginning in time, and no limits in space; it is 
infinite as regards both time and space." 

The second antinomy proves that every composite substance both is, and is not, made up of simple 
parts. 

The thesis of the third antinomy maintains that there are two kinds 


- 708 - 



of causality, one according to the laws of nature, the other that of freedom; the antithesis 
maintains that there is only causality according to the laws of nature. 

The fourth antinomy proves that there is, and is not, an absolutely necessary Being. 

This part of the Critique greatly influenced Hegel, whose dialectic proceeds wholly by way of 
antinomies. 

In a famous section, Kant sets to work to demolish all the purely intellectual proofs of the 
existence of God. He makes it clear that he has other reasons for believing in God; these he was to 
set forth later in The Critique of Practical Reason. But for the time being his purpose is purely 
negative. 

There are, he says, only three proofs of God's existence by pure reason; these are the ontological 
proof, the cosmological proof, and the physico-theological proof. 

The ontological proof, as he sets it forth, defines God as the ens realissimum, the most real being; 
i.e., the subject of all predicates that belong to being absolutely. It is contended, by those who 
believe the proof valid, that, since "existence" is such a predicate, this subject must have the 
predicate "existence," i.e., must exist. Kant objects that existence is not a predicate. A hundred 
thalers that I merely imagine may, he says, have all the same predicates as a hundred real thalers. 

The cosmological proof says: If anything exists, then an absolutely necessary Being must exist; 
now I know that I exist; therefore an absolutely necessary Being exists, and this must be the ens 
realissimum. Kant maintains that the last step in this argument is the ontological argument over 
again, and that it is therefore refuted by what has been already said. 

The physico-theological proof is the familiar argument from design, but in a metaphysical dress. It 
maintains that the universe exhibits an order which is evidence of purpose. This argument is 
treated by Kant with respect, but he points out that, at best, it proves only an Architect, not a 
Creator, and therefore cannot give an adequate conception of God. He concludes that "the only 
theology of reason which is possible is that which is based upon moral laws or seeks guidance 
from them." 

God, freedom, and immortality, he says, are the three "ideas of reason." But although pure reason 
leads us to form these ideas, it 


- 709 - 



cannot itself prove their reality. The importance of these ideas is practical, i.e., connected with 
morals. The purely intellectual use of reason leads to fallacies; its only right use is directed to 
moral ends. 

The practical use of reason is developed briefly near the end of The Critique of Pure Reason, and 
more fully in The Critique of Practical Reason ( 1786). The argument is that the moral law 
demands justice, i.e., happiness proportional to virtue. Only Providence can insure this, and has 
evidently not insured it in this life. Therefore there is a God and a future life; and there must be 
freedom, since otherwise there would be no such thing as virtue. 

Kant ethical system, as set forth in his Metaphysic of Morals ( 1785), has considerable historical 
importance. This book contains the "categorical imperative," which, at least as a phrase, is 
familiar outside the circle of professional philosophers. As might be expected, Kant will have 
nothing to do with utilitarianism, or with any doctrine which gives to morality a purpose outside 
itself. He wants, he says, "a completely isolated metaphysic of morals, which is not mixed with 
any theology or physics or hyperphysics." All moral concepts, he continues, have their seat and 
origin wholly a priori in the reason. Moral worth exists only when a man acts from a sense of 
duty; it is not enough that the act should be such as duty might have prescribed. The tradesman 
who is honest from self-interest, or the man who is kind from benevolent impulse, is not virtuous. 
The essence of morality is to be derived from the concept of law; for, though everything in nature 
acts according to laws, only a rational being has the power of acting according to the idea of a law, 
i.e., by Will. The idea of an objective principle, in so far as it is compelling to the will, is called a 
command of the reason, and the formula of the command is called an imperative. 

There are two sorts of imperative: the hypothetical imperative, which says "You must do so-and- 
so if you wish to achieve such-andsuch an end"; and the categorical imperative, which says that a 
certain kind of action is objectively necessary, without regard to any end. The categorical 
imperative is synthetic and a priori. Its character is deduced by Kant from the concept of Law: 

"If I think of a categorical imperative, I know at once what it contains. For as the imperative 
contains, besides the Law, only the necessity of the maxim to be in accordance with this law, but 
the Law 


- 710 - 



contains no condition by which it is limited, nothing remains over but the generality of a law in 
general, to which the maxim of the actions is to be conformable, and which conforming alone 
presents the imperative as necessary. Therefore the categorical imperative is a single one, and in 
fact this: Act only according to a maxim by which you can at the same time will that it shall 
become a general law. " Or: "Act as if the maxim of your action were to become through your will 
a general natural law. " 

Kant gives as an illustration of the working of the categorical imperative that it is wrong to borrow 
money, because if we all tried to do so there would be no money left to borrow. One can in like 
manner show that theft and murder are condemned by the categorical imperative. But there are 
some acts which Kant would certainly think wrong but which cannot be shown to be wrong by his 
principles, for instance suicide; it would be quite possible for a melancholic to wish that 
everybody should commit suicide. His maxim seems, in fact, to give a necessary but not a 
sufficient criterion of virtue. To get a sufficient criterion, we should have to abandon Kant's purely 
formal point of view, and take some account of the effects of actions. Kant, however, states 
emphatically that virtue does not depend upon the intended result of an action, but only on the 
principle of which it is itself a result; and if this is conceded, nothing more concrete than his 
maxim is possible. 

Kant maintains, although his principle does not seem to entail this consequence, that we ought so 
to act as to treat every man as an end in himself. This may be regarded as an abstract fonn of the 
doctrine of the rights of man, and it is open to the same objections. If taken seriously, it would 
make it impossible to reach a decision whenever two people’s interests conflict. The difficulties 
are particularly obvious in political philosophy, which requires some principle, such as preference 
for the majority, by which the interests of some can, when necessary, be sacrificed to those of 
others. If there is to be any ethic of government, the end of government must be one, and the only 
single end compatible with justice is the good of the community. It is possible, however, to 
interpret Kant's principle as meaning, not that each man is an absolute end, but that all men should 
count equally in detennining actions by which many are affected. So interpreted, the 


- 711 - 



principle may be regarded as giving an ethical basis for democracy. In this interpretation, it is not 
open to the above objection. 

Kant's vigour and freshness of mind in old age are shown by his treatise on Perpetual Peace 
( 1795). In this work he advocates a federation of free States, bound together by a covenant 
forbidding war. Reason, he says, utterly condemns war, which only an international government 
can prevent. The civil constitution of the component States should, he says, be "republican," but 
he defines this word as meaning that the executive and the legislative are separated. He does not 
mean that there should be no king; in fact, he says that it is easiest to get a perfect government 
under a monarchy. Writing under the impact of the Reign of Terror, he is suspicious of 
democracy; he says that it is of necessity despotism, since it establishes an executive power. "The 
'whole people,' so-called, who carry their measures are really not all, but only a majority: so that 
here the universal will is in contradiction with itself and with the principle of freedom." The 
phrasing shows the influence of Rousseau, but the important idea of a world federation as the way 
to secure peace is not derived from Rousseau. 

Since 1933, this treatise has caused Kant to fall into disfavour in his own country. 

C. KANT'S THEORY OF SPACE AND TIME 

The most important part of The Critique of Pure Reason is the doctrine of space and time. In this 
section I propose to make a critical examination of this doctrine. 

To explain Kant's theory of space and time clearly is not easy, because the theory itself is not 
clear. It is set forth both in The Critique of Pure Reason and in the Prolegomena', the latter 
exposition is the easier, but is less full than that in the Critique. I will try first to expound the 
theory, making it as plausible as I can; only after exposition will I attempt criticism. 

Kant holds that the immediate objects of perception are due partly to external things and partly to 
our own perceptive apparatus. Locke had accustomed the world to the idea that the secondary 
qualities-colours, sounds, smells, etc.— are subjective, and do not belong to the 

-712- 

object as it is in itself. Kant, like Berkeley and Hume, though in not quite the same way, goes 
further, and makes the primary qualities also subjective. Kant does not at most times question 
that our sensations have causes, which he calls "things-in-themselves" or "noumena." What 
appears to us in perception, which he calls a "phenomenon," consists of two parts: that due to 
the object, which he calls the "sensation," and that due to our subjective apparatus, which, he 
says, causes the manifold to be ordered in certain relations. This latter part he calls the form of 
the phenomenon. This part is not itself sensation, and therefore not dependent upon the accident 
of environment; it is always the same, since we carry it about with us, and it is a priori in the 
sense that it is not dependent upon experience. A pure fonn of sensibility is called a "pure 
intuition" ( Anschauung ); there are two such fonns, namely space and time, one for the outer 
sense, one for the inner. To prove that space and time are a priori forms, Kant has two classes of 
arguments, one metaphysical, the other epistemological, or, as he calls it, transcendental. The 
former class of arguments are taken directly from the nature of space and time, the latter 
indirectly from the possibility of pure mathematics. The arguments about space are given more 
fully than those about time, because it is thought that the latter are essentially the same as the 
former .As regards space, the metaphysical arguments are four in number. 

1 . Space is not an empirical concept, abstracted from outer experiences, for space is 
presupposed in referring sensations to something external, and external experience is 
only possible through the presentation of space. 



2. Space is a necessary presentation a priori, which underlies all external perceptions; for 
we cannot imagine that there should be no space, although we can imagine that there 
should be nothing in space. 

3. Space is not a discursive or general concept of the relations of things in general, for there 
is only one space, of which what we call "spaces" are parts, not instances. 

4. Space is presented as an infinite given magnitude, which holds within itself all the parts 
of space; this relation is different from that of a concept to its instances, and therefore 
space is not a concept but an Anschauung. 

The transcendental argument concerning space is derived from 

-713- 

geometry. Kant holds that Euclidean geometry is known a priori, although it is synthetic, i.e., not 
deducible from logic alone. Geometrical proofs, he considers, depend upon the figures; we can 
see, for instance, that, given two intersecting straight lines at right angles to each other, only one 
straight line at right angles to both can be drawn through their point of intersection. This 
knowledge, he thinks, is not derived from experience. But the only way in which my intuition can 
anticipate what will be found in the object is if it contains only the form of my sensibility, 
antedating in my subjectivity all the actual impressions. The objects of sense must obey geometry, 
because geometry is concerned with our ways of perceiving, and therefore we cannot perceive 
otherwise. This explains why geometry, though synthetic, is a priori and apodeictic. 

The arguments with regard to time are essentially the same, except that arithmetic replaces 
geometry with the contention that counting takes time. 

Let us now examine these arguments one by one. 

The first of the metaphysical arguments concerning space says: "Space is not an empirical concept 
abstracted from external experiences. For in order that certain sensations may be referred to 
something outside me [i.e., to something in a different position in space from that in which I find 
myself], and further in order that I may be able to perceive them as outside and beside each other, 
and thus as not merely different, but in different places, the presentation of space must already 
give the foundation [ zum Grunde liegen ]." Therefore external experience is only possible through 
the presentation of space. 

The phrase "outside me [i.e., in a different place from that in which I find myself]" is a difficult 
one. As a thing-in-itself, I am not anywhere, and nothing is spatially outside me; it is only my 
body as a phenomenon that can be meant. Thus all that is really involved is what comes in the 
second part of the sentence, namely that I perceive different objects as in different places. The 
image which arises in one's mind is that of a cloak-room attendant who hangs different coats on 
different pegs; the pegs must already exist, but the attendant's subjectivity arranges the coats. 

There is here, as throughout Kant's theory of the subjectivity of space and time, a difficulty which 
he seems to have never felt. What induces me to arrange objects of perception as I do rather than 
other- 


- 714 - 



wise? Why, for instance, do I always see people's eyes above their mouths and not below them? 
According to Kant, the eyes and the mouth exist as things in themselves, and cause my separate 
percepts, but nothing in them corresponds to the spatial arrangement that exists in my perception. 
Contrast with this the physical theory of colours. We do not suppose that in matter there are 
colours in the sense in which our percepts have colours, but we do think that different colours 
correspond to different wave-lengths. Since waves, however, involve space and time, there 
cannot, for Kant, be waves in the causes of our percepts. If, on the other hand, the space and time 
of our percepts have counterparts in the world of matter, as physics assumes, then geometry is 
applicable to these counterparts, and Kant's arguments fail. Kant holds that the mind orders the 
raw material of sensation, but never thinks it necessary to say why it orders it as it does and not 
otherwise. 

In regard to time this difficulty is even greater, because of the intrusion of causality. I perceive the 
lightning before I perceive the thunder; a thing-in-itself A caused my perception of lightning, and 
another thing-in-itself B caused my perception of thunder, but A was not earlier than B, since time 
exists only in the relations of percepts. Why, then, do the two timeless things A and B produce 
effects at different times? This must be wholly arbitrary if Kant is right, and there must be no 
relation betwen A and B corresponding to the fact that the percept caused by A is earlier than that 
caused by B. 

The second metaphysical argument maintains that it is possible to imagine nothing in space, but 
impossible to imagine no space. It seems to me that no serious argument can be based upon what 
we can or cannot imagine; but I should emphatically deny that we can imagine space with nothing 
in it. You can imagine looking at the sky on a dark cloudy night, but then you yourself are in 
space, and you imagine the clouds that you cannot see. Kant's space is absolute, like Newton's, 
and not merely a system of relations. But I do not see how absolute empty space can be imagined. 

The third metaphysical argument says: "Space is not a discursive, or, as is said, general concept of 
the relations of things in general, but a pure intuition. For, in the first place, we can only imagine 
[sich vorstellen] one single space, and if we speak of 'spaces' we mean only parts of one and the 
same unique space. And these parts cannot precede the whole as its parts . . . but can only be 
thought as in it. It 


- 715 - 



[space] is essentially unique, the manifold in it rests solely on limitations." From this it is 
concluded that space is an a priori intuition. 

The gist of this argument is the denial of plurality in space itself. What we call "spaces" are 
neither instances of a general concept "a space," nor parts of an aggregate. I do not know quite 
what, according to Kant, their logical status is, but in any case they are logically subsequent to 
space. To those who take, as practically all moderns do, a relational view of space, this argument 
becomes incapable of being stated, since neither "space" nor "spaces" can survive as a substantive. 

The fourth metaphysical argument is chiefly concerned to prove that space is an intuition, not a 
concept. Its premiss is "space is imagined [for presented, vorgestellt] as an infinite given 
magnitude." This is the view of a person living in a flat country, like that of KA][nigsberg; I do not 
see how an inhabitant of an Alpine valley could adopt it. It is difficult to see how anything infinite 
can be "given." I should have thought it obvious that the part of space that is given is that which is 
peopled by objects of perception, and that for other parts we have only a feeling of possibility of 
motion. And if so vulgar an argument may be intruded, modem astronomers maintain that space is 
in fact not infinite, but goes round and round, like the surface of the globe. 

The transcendental (or epistemological) argument, which is best stated in the Prolegomena, is 
more definite than the metaphysical arguments, and is also more definitely refutable. "Geometry," 
as we now know, is a name covering two different studies. On the one hand, there is pure 
geometry, which deduces consequences from axioms, without inquiring whether the axioms are 
"true"; this contains nothing that does not follow from logic, and is not "synthetic," and has no 
need of figures such as are used in geometrical text-books. On the other hand, there is geometry as 
a branch of physics, as it appears, for example, in the general theory of relativity; this is an 
empirical science, in which the axioms are inferred from measurements, and are found to differ 
from Euclid’s. Thus of the two kinds of geometry one is a priori but not synthetic, while the other 
is synthetic but not a priori. This disposes of the transcendental argument. 

Let us now try to consider the questions raised by Kant as regards space in a more general way. If 
we adopt the view, which is taken for granted in physics, that our percepts have external causes 
which 


- 716 - 



are (in some sense) material, we are led to the conclusion that all the actual qualities in percepts 
are different from those in their unperceived causes, but that there is a certain structural similarity 
between the system of percepts and the system of their causes. There is, for example, a correlation 
between colours (as perceived) and wavelengths (as inferred by physicists). Similarly there must 
be a correlation between space as an ingredient in percepts and space as an ingredient in the 
system of unperceived causes of percepts. All this rests upon the maxim "same cause, same 
effect," with its obverse, "different effects, different causes." Thus, e.g., when a visual percept A 
appears to the left of a visual percept B, we shall suppose that there is some corresponding 
relation between the cause of A and the cause of B. 

We have, on this view, two spaces, one subjective and one objective, one known in experience 
and the other merely inferred. But there is no difference in this respect between space and other 
aspects of perception, such as colours and sounds. All alike, in their subjective forms, are known 
empirically; all alike, in their objective forms, are inferred by means of a maxim as to causation. 
There is no reason whatever for regarding our knowledge of space as in any way different from 
our knowledge of colour and sound and smell. 

With regard to time, the matter is different, since, if we adhere to the belief in unperceived causes 
of percepts, the objective time must be identical with the subjective time. If not, we get into the 
difficulties already considered in connection with lightning and thunder. Or take such a case as the 
following: You hear a man speak, you answer him, and he hears you. His speaking, and his 
hearing of your reply, are both, so far as you are concerned, in the unperceived world; and in that 
world the former precedes the latter. Moreover his speaking precedes your hearing in the objective 
world of physics; your hearing precedes your reply in the subjective world of percepts; and your 
reply precedes his hearing in the objective world of physics. It is clear that the relation "precedes" 
must be the same in all these propositions. While, therefore, there is an important sense in which 
perceptual space is subjective, there is no sense in which perceptual time is subjective. 

The above arguments assume, as Kant does, that percepts are caused by "things in themselves," or, 
as we should say, by events in the world 


- 717 - 



of physics. This assumption, however, is by no means logically necessary. If it is abandoned, 
percepts cease to be in any important sense "subjective," since there is nothing with which to 
contrast them. 

The "thing-in-itself ' was an awkward element in Kant's philosophy, and was abandoned by his 
immediate successors, who accordingly fell into something very like solipsism. Kant's 
inconsistencies were such as to make it inevitable that philosophers who were influenced by him 
should develop rapidly either in the empirical or in the absolutist direction; it was, in fact, in the 
latter direction that German philosophy moved until after the death of Hegel. 

Kant's immediate successor, Fichte ( 1762-1814), abandoned "things in themselves," and carried 
subjectivism to a point which seems almost to involve a kind of insanity. He holds that the Ego is 
the only ultimate reality, and that it exists because it posits itself; the non-Ego, which has a 
subordinate reality, also exists only because the Ego posits it. Fichte is not important as a pure 
philosopher, but as the theoretical founder of German nationalism, by his Addresses to the 
German Nation ( 1807-8), which were intended to rouse the Germans to resistance to Napoleon 
after the battle of Jena. The Ego as a metaphysical concept easily became confused with the 
empirical Fichte; since the Ego was German, it followed that the Germans were superior to all 
other nations. "To have character and to be a German," says Fichte, "undoubtedly mean the same 
thing." On this basis he worked out a whole philosophy of nationalistic totalitarianism, which had 
great influence in Germany. 

His immediate successor Schelling ( 1775-1854) was more amiable, but not less subjective. He 
was closely associated with the German romantics; philosophically, though famous in his day, he 
is not important. The important development from Kant's philosophy was that of Hegel. 

-718- 

CHAPTER XXI Currents of Thought in the Nineteenth Century 

THE intellectual life of the nineteenth century was more complex than that of any previous age. 
This was due to several causes. First: the area concerned was larger than ever before; America and 
Russia made important contributions, and Europe became more aware than formerly of Indian 
philosophies, both ancient and modern. Second: science, which had been a chief source of novelty 
since the seventeenth century, made new conquests, especially in geology, biology, and organic 
chemistry. Third: machine production profoundly altered the social structure, and gave men a new 
conception of their powers in relation to the physical environment. Fourth: a profound revolt, both 
philosophical and political, against traditional systems in thought, in politics, and in economics, 
gave rise to attacks upon many beliefs and institutions that had hitherto been regarded as 
unassailable. This revolt had two very different forms, one romantic, the other rationalistic. (I am 
using these words in a liberal sense.) The romantic revolt passes from Byron, Schopenhauer, and 
Nietzsche to Mussolini and Hitler; the rationalistic revolt begins with the French philosophers of 
the Revolution, passes on, somewhat softened, to the philosophical radicals in England, then 
acquires a deeper form in Marx and issues in Soviet Russia. 

The intellectual predominance of Germany is a new factor, beginning with Kant. Leibniz, though 
a German, wrote almost always in Latin or French, and was very little influenced by Germany in 
his philosophy. German idealism after Kant, as well as later German philosophy, was, on the 
contrary, profoundly influenced by German history; much of what seems strange in German 
philosophical specu- 


- 719 - 



lation reflects the state of mind of a vigorous nation deprived, by historical accidents, of its natural 
share of power. Germany had owed its international position to the Holy Roman Empire, but the 
Emperor had gradually lost control of his nominal subjects. The last powerful Emperor was 
Charles V, and he owed his power to his possessions in Spain and the Low Countries. The 
Refonnation and the Thirty Years' War destroyed what had been left of Gennan unity, leaving a 
number of petty principalities which were at the mercy of France. In the eighteenth century only 
one German state, Prussia, had successfully resisted the French; that is why Frederick was called 
the Great. But Prussia itself had failed to stand against Napoleon, being utterly defeated in the 
battle of Jena. The resurrection of Prussia under Bismarck appeared as a revival of the heroic past 
of Alaric, Charlemagne, and Barbarossa. (To Gennans, Charlemagne is a German, not a 
Frenchman.) Bismarck showed his sense of history when he said, "We will not go to Canossa." 

Prussia, however, though politically predominant, was culturally less advanced than much of 
Western Gennany; this explains why many eminent Gennans, including Goethe, did not regret 
Napoleon's success at Jena. Gennany, at the beginning of the nineteenth century, presented an 
extraordinary cultural and economic diversity. In East Prussia serfdom still survived; the rural 
aristocracy were largely immersed in bucolic ignorance, and the labourers were completely 
without even the rudiments of education. Western Gennany, on the other hand, had been in part 
subject to Rome in antiquity; it had been under French influence since the seventeenth century; it 
had been occupied by French revolutionary armies, and had acquired institutions as liberal as 
those of France. Some of the princes were intelligent, patrons of the arts and sciences, imitating 
Renaissance princes in their courts; the most notable example was Weimar, where the Grand 
Duke was Goethe's patron. The princes were, naturally, for the most part opposed to Gennan 
unity, since it would destroy their independence. They were therefore anti-patriotic, and so were 
many of the eminent men who depended on them, to whom Napoleon appeared the missionary of 
a higher culture than that of Gennany. 

Gradually, during the nineteenth century, the culture of Protestant Germany became increasingly 
Prussian. Frederick the Great, as a free-thinker and an admirer of French philosophy, had 
struggled to 


- 720 - 



make Berlin a cultural centre; the Berlin Academy had as its perpetual President an eminent 
Frenchman, Maupertuis, who, however, unfortunately became the victim of Voltaire's deadly 
ridicule. Frederick's endeavours, like those of the other enlightened despots of the time, did not 
include economic or political reform; all that was really achieved was a claque of hired 
intellectuals. After his death, it was again in Western Germany that most of the men of culture 
were to be found. 

German philosophy was more connected with Prussia than were German literature and art. Kant 
was a subject of Frederick the Great; Fichte and Hegel were professors at Berlin. Kant was little 
influenced by Prussia; indeed he got into trouble with the Prussian Government for his liberal 
theology. But both Fichte and Hegel were philosophic mouthpieces of Prussia, and did much to 
prepare the way for the later identification of German patriotism with admiration for Prussia. 

Their work in this respect was carried on by the great German historians, particularly by 
Mommsen and Treitschke. Bismarck finally persuaded the German nation to accept unification 
under Prussia, and thus gave the victory to the less internationally minded elements in German 
culture. 

Throughout the whole period after the death of Hegel, most academic philosophy remained 
traditional, and therefore not very important. British empiricist philosophy was dominant in 
England until near the end of the century, and in France until a somewhat earlier time; then, 
gradually, Kant and Hegel conquered the universities of France and England, so far as their 
teachers of technical philosophy were concerned. The general educated public, however, was very 
little affected by this movement, which had few adherents among men of science. The writers who 
carried on the academic tradition— John Stuart Mill on the empiricist side, Lotze, Sigwart, Bradley, 
and Bosanquet on the side of German idealism— were none of them quite in the front rank among 
philosophers, that is to say, they were not the equals of the men whose systems they, on the whole, 
adopted. Academic philosophy has often before been out of touch with the most vigorous thought 
of the age, for instance, in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, when it was still mainly 
scholastic. Whenever this happens, the historian of philosophy is less concerned with the 
professors than with the unprofessional heretics. 


- 721 - 



Most of the philosophers of the French Revolution combined science with beliefs associated with 
Rousseau. HelvA©tius and Condorcet may be regarded as typical in their combination of 
rationalism and enthusiasm. 

HelvA©tius ( 1715-1771) had the honour of having his book De I'Esprit ( 1758) condemned by 
the Sorbonne and burnt by the hangman. Bentham read him in 1769 and immediately determined 
to devote his life to the principles of legislation, saying: "What Bacon was to the physical world, 
HelvA©tius was to the moral. The moral world has therefore had its Bacon, but its Newton is still 
to come." James Mill took HelvA©tius as his guide in the education of his son John Stuart. 

Following Locke's doctrine that the mind is a tabula rasa, HelvA©tius considered the differences 
between individuals entirely due to differences of education: in every individual, his talents and 
his virtues are the effect of his instruction. Genius, he maintains, is often due to chance: if 
Shakespeare had not been caught poaching, he would have been a wool merchant. His interest in 
legislation comes from the doctrine that the principal instructors of adolescence are the forms of 
government and the consequent manners and customs. Men are born ignorant, not stupid; they are 
made stupid by education. 

In ethics, HelvA©tius was a utilitarian; he considered pleasure to be the good. In religion, he was 
a deist, and vehemently anti-clerical. In theory of knowledge, he adopted a simplified version of 
Locke: "Enlightened by Locke, we know that it is to the sense-organs we owe our ideas, and 
consequently our mind." Physical sensibility, he says, is the sole cause of our actions, our 
thoughts, our passions, and our sociability. He strongly disagrees with Rousseau as to the value of 
knowledge, which he rates very highly. 

His doctrine is optimistic, since only a perfect education is needed to make men perfect. There is a 
suggestion that it would be easy to find a perfect education if the priests were got out of the way. 

Condorcet ( 1743-1794) has opinions similar to those of HelvA©tius, but more influenced by 
Rousseau. The rights of man, he says, are all deduced from this one truth, that he is a sensitive 
being, capable of making reasonings and acquiring moral ideas, from which it follows that men 
can no longer be divided into rulers and subjects, liars and dupes. "These principles, for which the 
generous Sydney gave his life and to which Locke attached the authority of his name, were 


- 722 - 



afterwards developed more precisely by Rousseau." Locke, he says, first showed the limits of 
human knowledge. His "method soon became that of all philosophers, and it is by applying it to 
morals, politics, and economics, that they have succeeded in pursuing in these sciences a road 
almost as sure as that of the natural sciences." 

Condorcet much admires the American Revolution. "Simple common sense taught the inhabitants 
of the British Colonies that Englishmen bom on the other side of the Atlantic Ocean had precisely 
the same rights as those born on the meridian of Greenwich." The United States Constitution, he 
says, is based on natural rights, and the American Revolution made the rights of man known to all 
Europe, from the Neva to the Guadalquivir. The principles of the French Revolution, however, are 
"purer, more precise, deeper than those that guided the Americans." These words were written 
while he was in hiding from Robespierre; shortly afterwards, he was caught and imprisoned. He 
died in prison, but the manner of his death is uncertain. 

He was a believer in the equality of women. He was also the inventor of Malthus's theory of 
population, which, however, had not for him the gloomy consequences that it had for Malthus, 
because he coupled it with the necessity of birth control. Malthus's father was a disciple of 
Condorcet, and it was in this way that Malthus came to know of the theory. 

Condorcet is even more enthusiastic and optimistic than HelvAOtius. He believes that, through 
the spread of the principles of the French Revolution, all the major social ills will soon disappear. 
Perhaps he was fortunate in not living beyond 1794. 

The doctrines of the French revolutionary philosophers, made less enthusiastic and much more 
precise, were brought to England by the philosophical radicals, of whom Bentham was the 
recognized chief. Bentham was, at first, almost exclusively interested in law; gradually, as he grew 
older, his interests widened and his opinions became more subversive. After 1808, he was a 
republican, a believer in the equality of women, an enemy of imperialism, and an uncompromising 
democrat. Some of these opinions he owed to James Mill. Both believed in the omnipotence of 
education. Bentham's adoption of the principle of "the greatest happiness of the greatest number" 
was no doubt due to democratic feeling, but it involved opposition to the doctrine of the rights of 
man, which he bluntly characterized as "nonsense." 


- 723 - 



The philosophical radicals differed from men like HelvAOtius and Condorcet in many ways. 
Temperamentally, they were patient and fond of working out their theories in practical detail. 

They attached great importance to economics, which they believed themselves to have developed 
as a science. Tendencies to enthusiasm, which existed in Bentham and John Stuart Mill, but not in 
Malthus or James Mill, were severely held in check by this "science," and particularly by 
Malthus's gloomy version of the theory of population, according to which most wage-earners must 
always, except just after a pestilence, earn the smallest amount that will keep them and their 
families alive. Another great difference between the Benthamites and their French predecessors 
was that in industrial England there was violent conflict between employers and wage-earners, 
which gave rise to tradeunionism and socialism. In this conflict the Benthamites, broadly 
speaking, sided with the employers against the working class. Their last representative, John 
Stuart Mill, however, gradually ceased to give adherence to his father's stem tenets, and became, 
as he grew older, less and less hostile to socialism, and less and less convinced of the eternal truth 
of classical economics. According to his autobiography, this softening process was begun by the 
reading of the romantic poets. 

The Benthamites, though at first revolutionary in a rather mild way, gradually ceased to be so, 
partly through success in converting the British government to some of their views, partly through 
opposition to the growing strength of socialism and trade-unionism. Men who were in revolt 
against tradition, as already mentioned, were of two kinds, rationalistic and romantic, though in 
men like Condorcet both elements were combined. The Benthamites were almost wholly 
rationalistic, and so were the Socialists who rebelled against them as well as against the existing 
economic order. This movement does not acquire a complete philosophy until we come to Marx, 
who will be considered in a later chapter. 

The romantic form of revolt is very different from the rationalist fonn, though both are derived 
from the French Revolution and the philosophers who immediately preceded it. The romantic 
form is to be seen in Byron in an unphilosophical dress, but in Schopenhauer and Nietzsche it has 
leamt the language of philosophy. It tends to emphasize the will at the expense of the intellect, to 
be impatient of 


- 724 - 



chains of reasoning, and to glorify violence of certain kinds. In practical politics it is important as 
an ally of nationalism. In tendency, if not always in fact, it is definitely hostile to what is 
commonly called reason, and tends to be anti-scientific. Some of its most extreme forms are to be 
found among Russian anarchists, but in Russia it was the rationalist fonn of revolt that finally 
prevailed. It was Germany, always more susceptible to romanticism than any other country, that 
provided a governmental outlet for the anti-rational philosophy of naked will. 

So far, the philosophies that we have been considering have had an inspiration which was 
traditional, literary, or political. But there were two other sources of philosophical opinion, 
namely science and machine production. The second of these began its theoretical influence with 
Marx, and has grown gradually more important ever since. The first has been important since the 
seventeenth century, but took new forms during the nineteenth century. 

What Galileo and Newton were to the seventeenth century, Darwin was to the nineteenth. 
Darwin's theory had two parts. On the one hand, there was the doctrine of evolution, which 
maintained that the different fonns of life had developed gradually from a common ancestry. This 
doctrine, which is now generally accepted, was not new. It had been maintained by Lamarck and 
by Darwin's grandfather Erasmus, not to mention Anaximander. Darwin supplied an immense 
mass of evidence for the doctrine, and in the second part of his theory believed himself to have 
discovered the cause of evolution. He thus gave to the doctrine a popularity and a scientific force 
which it had not previously possessed, but he by no means originated it. 

The second part of Darwin's theory was the struggle for existence and the survival of the fittest. 
All animals and plants multiply faster than nature can provide for them; therefore in each 
generation many perish before the age for reproducing themselves. What determines which will 
survive? To some extent, no doubt, sheer luck, but there is another cause of more importance. 
Animals and plants are, as a rule, not exactly like their parents, but differ slightly by excess or 
defect in every measurable characteristic. In a given environment, members of the same species 
compete for survival, and those best adapted to the environment have the best chance. Therefore 
among chance variations those that are favourable will preponderate among adults in 


- 725 - 



each generation. Thus from age to age deer run more swiftly, cats stalk their prey more silently, 
and giraffes' necks become longer. Given enough time, this mechanism, so Darwin contended, 
could account for the whole long development from the protozoa to homo sapiens. 

This part of Darwin's theory has been much disputed, and is regarded by most biologists as subject 
to many important qualifications. That, however, is not what most concerns the historian of 
nineteenth-century ideas. From the historical point of view, what is interesting is Darwin's 
extension to the whole of life of the economics that characterized the philosophical radicals. The 
motive force of evolution, according to him, is a kind of biological economics in a world of free 
competition. It was Malthus's doctrine of population, extended to the world of animals and plants, 
that suggested to Darwin the struggle for existence and the survival of the fittest as the source of 
evolution. 

Darwin himself was a liberal, but his theories had consequences in some degree inimical to 
traditional liberalism. The doctrine that all men are born equal, and that the differences between 
adults are due wholly to education, was incompatible with his emphasis on congenital differences 
between members of the same species. If, as Lamarck held, and as Darwin himself was willing to 
concede up to a point, acquired characteristics were inherited, this opposition to such views as 
those of HelvA©tius could have been somewhat softened; but it has appeared that only congenital 
characteristics are inherited, apart from certain not very important exceptions. Thus the congenital 
differences between men acquire fundamental importance. 

There is a further consequence of the theory of evolution, which is independent of the particular 
mechanism suggested by Darwin. If men and animals have a common ancestry, and if men 
developed by such slow stages that there were creatures which we should not know whether to 
classify as human or not, the question arises: at what stage in evolution did men, or their semi- 
human ancestors, begin to be all equal? Would Pithecanthropus erectus, if he had been properly 
educated, have done work as good as Newton's? Would the Piltdown Man have written 
Shakespeare's poetry if there had been anybody to convict him of poaching? A resolute egalitarian 
who answers these questions in the affirmative will find himself forced to regard apes as the 
equals of human beings. And why stop with apes? 


- 726 - 



I do not see how he is to resist an argument in favour of Votes for Oysters. An adherent of 
evolution may maintain that not only the doctrine of the equality of all men, but also that of the 
rights of man, must be condemned as unbiological, since it makes too emphatic a distinction 
between men and other animals. 

There is, however, another aspect of liberalism which was greatly strengthened by the doctrine of 
evolution, namely the belief in progress. So long as the state of the world allowed optimism, 
evolution was welcomed by liberals, both on this ground and because it gave new arguments 
against orthodox theology. Marx himself, though his. doctrines are in some respects pre- 
Darwinian, wished to dedicate his book to Darwin. 

The prestige of biology caused men whose thinking was influenced by science to apply biological 
rather than mechanistic categories to the world. Everything was supposed to be evolving, and it 
was easy to imagine an immanent goal. In spite of Darwin, many men considered that evolution 
justified a belief in cosmic purpose. The conception of organism came to be thought the key to 
both scientific and philosophical explanations of natural laws, and the atomic thinking of the 
eighteenth century came to be regarded as out of date. This point of view has at last influenced 
even theoretical physics. In politics it leads naturally to emphasis upon the community as opposed 
to the individual. This is in hannony with the growing power of the State; also with nationalism, 
which can appeal to the Darwinian doctrine of survival of the fittest applied, not to individuals, 
but to nations. But here we are passing into the region of extra-scientific views suggested to a 
large public by scientific doctrines imperfectly understood. 

While biology has militated against a mechanistic view of the world, modern economic technique 
has had an opposite effect. Until about the end of the eighteenth century, scientific technique, as 
opposed to scientific doctrines, had no important effect upon opinion. It was only with the rise of 
industrialism that technique began to affect men's thought. And even then, for a long time, the 
effect was more or less indirect. Men who produce philosophical theories are, as a rule, brought 
into very little contact with machinery. The romantics noticed and hated the ugliness that 
industrialism was producing in places hitherto beautiful, and the vulgarity (as they considered it) 
of those who had made money in "trade." This led them into an 


- 727 - 



opposition to the middle class which sometimes brought them into something like an alliance with 
the champions of the proletariat. Engels praised Carlyle, not perceiving that what Carlyle desired 
was not the emancipation of wage-earners, but their subjection to the kind of masters they had had 
in the Middle Ages. The Socialists welcomed industrialism, but wished to free industrial workers 
from subjection to the power of employers. They were influenced by industrialism in the problems 
that they considered, but not much in the ideas that they employed in the solution of their 
problems. 

The most important effect of machine production on the imaginative picture of the world is an 
immense increase in the sense of human power. This is only an acceleration of a process which 
began before the dawn of history, when men diminished their fear of wild animals by the 
invention of weapons and their fear of starvation by the invention of agriculture. But the 
acceleration has been so great as to produce a radically new outlook in those who wield the 
powers that modern technique has created. In old days, mountains and waterfalls were natural 
phenomena; now, an inconvenient mountain can be abolished and a convenient waterfall can be 
created. In old days, there were deserts and fertile regions; now, the desert can, if people think it 
worth while, be made to blossom like the rose, while fertile regions are turned into deserts by 
insufficiently scientific optimists. In old days, peasants lived as their parents and grandparents had 
lived, and believed as their parents and grandparents had believed; not all the power of the Church 
could eradicate pagan ceremonies, which had to be given a Christian dress by being connected 
with local saints. Now the authorities can decree what the children of peasants shall learn in 
school, and can transform the mentality of agriculturists in a generation; one gathers that this has 
been achieved in Russia. 

There thus arises, among those who direct affairs or are in touch with those who do so, a new 
belief in power: first, the power of man in his conflicts with nature, and then the power of rulers as 
against the human beings whose beliefs and aspirations they seek to control by scientific 
propaganda, especially education. The result is a diminution of fixity; no change seems 
impossible. Nature is raw material; so is that part of the human race which does not effectively 
participate in government. There are certain old conceptions which represent men's belief in the 
limits of human power; of these the two chief are 


- 728 - 



God and truth. (I do not mean that these two are logically connected.) Such conceptions tend to 
melt away; even if not explicitly negated, they lose importance, and are retained only superficially. 
This whole outlook is new, and it is impossible to say how mankind will adapt itself to it. It has 
already produced immense cataclysms, and will no doubt produce others in the future. To frame a 
philosophy capable of coping with men intoxicated with the prospect of almost unlimited power 
and also with the apathy of the powerless is the most pressing task of our time. 

Though many still sincerely believe in human equality and theoretical democracy, the imagination 
of modern people is deeply affected by the pattern of social organization suggested by the 
organization of industry in the nineteenth century, which is essentially undemocratic. On the one 
hand there are the captains of industry, and on the other the mass of workers. This disruption of 
democracy from within is not yet acknowledged by ordinary citizens in democratic countries, but 
it has been a preoccupation of most philosophers from Hegel onwards, and the sharp opposition 
which they discovered between the interests of the many and those of the few has found practical 
expression in Fascism. Of the philosophers, Nietzsche was unashamedly on the side of the few, 
Marx whole-heartedly on the side of the many. Perhaps Bentham was the only one of importance 
who attempted a reconciliation of conflicting interests; he therefore incurred the hostility of both 
parties. 

To formulate any satisfactory modern ethic of human relationships it will be essential to recognize 
the necessary limitations of men's power over the non-human environment, and the desirable 
limitations of their power over each other. 


-729- 

CHAPTER XXII Hegel 

HEGEL ( 1770-183 1) was the culmination of the movement in German philosophy that started 
from Kant; although he often criticized Kant, his system could never have arisen if Kant's had not 
existed. His influence, though now diminishing, has been very great, not only or chiefly in 
Germany. At the end of the nineteenth century, the leading academic philosophers, both in 
America and in Great Britain, were largely Hegelians. Outside of pure philosophy, many 
Protestant theologians adopted his doctrines, and his philosophy of history profoundly affected 
political theory. Marx, as every one knows, was a disciple of Hegel in his youth, and retained in 
his own finished system some important Hegelian features. Even if (as I myself believe) almost all 
Hegel's doctrines are false, he still retains an importance which is not merely historical, as the best 
representative of a certain kind of philosophy which, in others, is less coherent and less 
comprehensive. 

His life contained few events of importance. In youth he was much attracted to mysticism, and his 
later views may be regarded, to some extent, as an intellectualizing of what had first appeared to 
him as mystic insight. He taught philosophy, first as Privatdozent at Jena-he mentions that he 
finished his Phenomenology of Mind there the day before the battle of Jena— then at Nuremberg, 
then as professor at Heidelberg ( 1816-1818), and finally at Berlin from 1818 to his death. He was 
in later life a patriotic Prussian, a loyal servant of the State, who comfortably enjoyed his 
recognized philosophical preeminence; but in his youth he despised Prussia and admired 
Napoleon, to the extent of rejoicing in the French victory at Jena. 

Hegel's philosophy is very difficult— he is, I should say, the hardest to understand of all the great 
philosophers. Before entering on any detail, a general characterization may prove helpful. 


- 730 - 



From his early interest in mysticism he retained a belief in the unreality of separateness; the world, 
in his view, was not a collection of hard units, whether atoms or souls, each completely self- 
subsistent. The apparent self-subsistence of finite things appeared to him to be an illusion; 
nothing, he held, is ultimately and completely real except the whole. But he differed from 
Parmenides and Spinoza in conceiving the whole, not as a simple substance, but as a complex 
system, of the sort that we should call an organism. The apparently separate things of which the 
world seems to be composed are not simply an illusion; each has a greater or lesser degree of 
reality, and its reality consists in an aspect of the whole, which is what it is seen to be when 
viewed truly. With this view goes naturally a disbelief in the reality of time and space as such, for 
these, if taken as completely real, involve separateness and multiplicity. All this must have come 
to him first as mystic "insight"; its intellectual elaboration, which is given in his books, must have 
come later. 

Hegel asserts that the real is rational, and the rational is real. But when he says this he does not 
mean by "the real" what an empiricist would mean. He admits, and even urges, that what to the 
empiricist appear to be facts are, and must be, irrational; it is only after their apparent character 
has been transformed by viewing them as aspects of the whole that they are seen to be rational. 
Nevertheless, the identification of the real and the rational leads unavoidably to some of the 
complacency inseparable from the belief that "whatever is, is right." 

The whole, in all its complexity, is called by Hegefthe Absolute." The Absolute is spiritual; 
Spinoza's view, that it has the attribute of extension as well as that of thought, is rejected. 

Two things distinguish Hegel from other men who have had a more or less similar metaphysical 
outlook. One of these is emphasis on logic: it is thought by Hegel that the nature of Reality can be 
deduced from the sole consideration that it must be not self-contradictory. The other 
distinguishing feature (which is closely connected with the first) is the triadic movement called the 
"dialectic." His most important books are his two Logics, and these must be understood if the 
reasons for his views on other subjects are to be rightly apprehended. 

Logic, as Hegel understands the word, is declared by him to be 


- 731 - 



the same thing as metaphysics; it is something quite different from what is commonly called logic. 
His view is that any ordinary predicate, if taken as qualifying the whole of Reality, turns out to be 
selfcontradictory. One might take as a crude example the theory of Parmenides, that the One, 
which alone is real, is spherical. Nothing can be spherical unless it has a boundary, and it cannot 
have a boundary unless there is something (at least empty space) outside of it. Therefore to 
suppose the Universe as a whole to be spherical is self-contradictory. (This argument might be 
questioned by bringing in nonEuclidean geometry, but as an illustration it will serve.) Or let us 
take another illustration, still more crude— far too much so to be used by Hegel. You may say, 
without apparent contradiction, that Mr. A is an uncle; but if you were to say that the Universe is 
an uncle, you would land yourself in difficulties. An uncle is a man who has a nephew, and the 
nephew is a separate person from the uncle; therefore an uncle cannot be the whole of Reality. 

This illustration might also be used to illustrate the dialectic, which consists of thesis, antithesis, 
and synthesis. First we say: "Reality is an uncle." This is the Thesis. But the existence of an uncle 
implies that of a nephew. Since nothing really exists except the Absolute, and we are now 
committed to the existence of a nephew, we must conclude: "The Absolute is a nephew." This is 
the Antithesis. But there is the same objection to this as to the view that the Absolute is an uncle; 
therefore we are driven to the view that the Absolute is the whole composed of uncle and nephew. 
This is the Synthesis. But this synthesis is still unsatisfactory, because a man can be an uncle only 
if he has a brother or sister who is a parent of the nephew. Hence we are driven to enlarge our 
universe to include the brother or sister, with his wife or her husband. In this sort of way, so it is 
contended, we can be driven on, by the mere force of logic, from any suggested predicate of the 
Absolute to the final conclusion of the dialectic, which is called the "Absolute Idea." Throughout 
the whole process, there is an underlying assumption that nothing can be really true unless it is 
about Reality as a whole. 

For this underlying assumption there is a basis in traditional logic, which assumes that every 
proposition has a subject and a predicate. According to this view, every fact consists in something 
having some 


- 732 - 



property. It follows that relations cannot be real, since they involve two things, not one. "Uncle" is 
a relation, and a man may become an uncle without knowing it. In that case, from an empirical 
point of view, the man is unaffected by becoming an uncle; he has no quality which he did not 
have before, if by "quality" we understand something necessary to describing him as he is in 
himself, apart from his relations to other people and things. The only way in which the subject- 
predicate logic can avoid this difficulty is to say that the truth is not a property of the uncle alone, 
or of the nephew alone, but of the whole composed of uncle-and-nephew. Since everything, 
except the Whole, has relations to outside things, it follows that nothing quite true can be said 
about separate things, and that in fact only the Whole is real. This follows more directly from the 
fact that "A and B are two" is not a subject-predicate proposition, and therefore, on the basis of the 
traditional logic, there can be no such proposition. Therefore there are not as many as two things 
in the world; therefore the Whole, considered as a unity, is alone real. 

The above argument is not explicit in Hegel, but is implicit in his system, as in that of many other 
metaphysicians. 

A few examples of Hegel's dialectic method may serve to make it more intelligible. He begins the 
argument of his logic by the assumption that "the Absolute is Pure Being"; we assume that it just 
is, without assigning any qualities to it. But pure being without any qualities is nothing; therefore 
we are led to the antithesis: "The Absolute is Nothing." From this thesis and antithesis we pass on 
to the synthesis: The union of Being and Not-Being is Becoming, and so we say: "The Absolute is 
Becoming." This also, of course, won't do, because there has to be something that becomes. In this 
way our views of Reality develop by the continual correction of previous errors, all of which arose 
from undue abstraction, by taking something finite or limited as if it could be the whole. "The 
limitations of the finite do not come merely from without; its own nature is the cause of its 
abrogation, and by its own act it passes into its counterpart." 

The process, according to Hegel, is essential to the understanding of the result. Each later stage of 
the dialectic contains all the earlier stages, as it were in solution; none of them is wholly 
superseded, but is given its proper place as a moment in the Whole. It is therefore 


- 733 - 



impossible to reach the truth except by going through all the steps of the dialectic. 


Knowledge as a whole has its triadic movement. It begins with senseperception, in which there is 
only awareness of the object. Then, through sceptical criticism of the senses, it becomes purely 
subjective. At last, it reaches the stage of self-knowledge, in which subject and object are no 
longer distinct. Thus self-consciousness is the highest form of knowledge. This, of course, must 
be the case in Hegel’s system, for the highest kind of knowledge must be that possessed by the 
Absolute, and as the Absolute is the Whole there is nothing outside itself for it to know. 

In the best thinking, according to Hegel, thoughts become fluent and interfuse. Truth and 
falsehood are not sharply defined opposites, as is commonly supposed; nothing is wholly false, 
and nothing that we can know is wholly true. "We can know in a way that is false"; this happens 
when we attribute absolute truth to some detached piece of infonnation. Such a question as 
"Where was Caesar born?" has a straightforward answer, which is true in a sense, but not in the 
philosophical sense. For philosophy, "the truth is the whole," and nothing partial is quite true. 

"Reason," Hegel says, "is the conscious certainty of being all reality." This does not mean that a 
separate person is all reality; in his separateness he is not quite real, but what is real in him is his 
participation in Reality as a whole. In proportion as we become more rational, this participation is 
increased. 

The Absolute Idea, with which the Logic ends, is something like Aristotle's God. It is thought 
thinking about itself. Clearly the Absolute cannot think about anything but itself, since there is 
nothing else, except to our partial and erroneous ways of apprehending Reality. We are told that 
Spirit is the only reality, and that its thought is reflected into itself by self-consciousness. The 
actual words in which the Absolute Idea is defined are very obscure. Wallace translates them as 
follows: 

" The Absolute Idea. The Idea, as unity of the Subjective and Objective Idea, is the notion of the 
Idea— a notion whose object ( Gegenstand) is the Idea as such, and for which the objective ( Objekt ) 
is Idea— an Object which embraces all characteristics in its unity." 


- 734 - 



The original German is even more difficult. jyThe essence of the matter is, however, somewhat 
less complicated than Hegel makes it seem. The Absolute Idea is pure thought thinking about 
pure thought. This is all that God does throughout the ages— truly a Professor's God. Hegel goes 
on to say: "This unity is consequently the absolute and all truth, the Idea which thinks itself." 

I come now to a singular feature of Hegel's philosophy, which distinguishes it from the 
philosophy of Plato or Plotinus or Spinoza. Although ultimate reality is timeless, and time is 
merely an illusion generated by our inability to see the Whole, yet the time-process has an 
intimate relation to the purely logical process of the dialectic. World history, in fact, has 
advanced through the categories, from Pure Being in China (of which Hegel knew nothing 
except that it was) to the Absolute Idea, which seems to have been nearly, if not quite, realized 
in the Prussian State. I cannot see any justification, on the basis of his own metaphysic, for the 
view that world history repeats the transitions of the dialectic, yet that is the thesis which he 
developed in his Philosophy of History. It was an interesting thesis, giving unity and meaning to 
the revolutions of human affairs. Like other historical theories, it required, if it was to be made 
plausible, some distortion of facts and considerable ignorance. Hegel, like Marx and Spengler 
after him, possessed both these qualifications. It is odd that a process which is represented as 
cosmic should all have taken place on our planet, and most of it near the Mediterranean. Nor is 
there any reason, if reality is timeless, why the later parts of the process should embody higher 
categories than the earlier partsunless one were to adopt the blasphemous supposition that the 
Universe was gradually learning Hegel's philosophy. 

The time-process, according to Hegel, is from the less to the more perfect, both in an ethical 
and in a logical sense. Indeed these two senses are, for him, not really distinguishable, for 
logical perfection consists in being a closely-knit whole, without ragged edges, without 
independent parts, but united, like a human body, or still more like a reasonable mind, into an 
organism whose parts are interdependent and all work together towards a single end; and this 
also constitutes 


* The definition in German is: " Der Begriff der Idee, dem die Idee a Is solche der 
Gegenstand, dem das Objekt sie ist." Except in Hegel, Gegenstand and Objekt are 
synonyms. 


- 735 - 


ethical perfection. A few quotations will illustrate Hegel's theory: 

"Like the soul-conductor Mercury, the Idea is, in truth, the leader of peoples and of the world; and 
Spirit, the rational and necessitated will of that conductor, is and has been the director of the 
events of the world's history. To become acquainted with Spirit in this its office of guidance, is the 
object of our present undertaking." 

"The only thought which philosophy brings with it to the contemplation of history is the simple 
conception of Reason; that Reason is the sovereign of the world; that the history of the world, 
therefore, presents us with a rational process. This conviction and intuition is a hypothesis in the 
domain of history as such. In that of philosophy it is no hypothesis. It is there proved by 
speculative cognition, that Reason— and this term may here suffice us, without investigating the 
relation sustained by the universe to the Divine Being— is Substance, as well as Infinite Power, its 
own infinite material underlying all the natural and spiritual life which it originates, as also the 
Infinite Form, that which sets the material in motion. Reason is the substance of the universe." 

"That this 'Idea' or 'Reason' is the True, the Eternal, the absolutely powerful essence; that it reveals 
itself in the world, and that in that world nothing else is revealed but this and its honour and 
glory-is the thesis which, as we have said, has been proved in philosophy, and is here regarded as 
demonstrated." 

"The world of intelligence and conscious volition is not abandoned to chance, but must show 
itself in the light of the self-cognizant Idea." 

This is "a result which happens to be known to me, because I have traversed the entire field." 

All these quotations are from the introduction to The Philosophy of History. 

Spirit, and the course of its development, is the substantial object of the philosophy of history. The 
nature of Spirit may be understood by contrasting it with its opposite, namely Matter. The essence 
of matter is gravity; the essence of Spirit is Freedom. Matter is outside itself, whereas Spirit has its 
centre in itself. "Spirit is self-contained existence." If this is not clear, the following definition 
may be found more illuminating: 

"But what is Spirit? It is the one immutably homogeneous Infinite —pure Identity— which in its 
second phase separates itself from itself 


- 736 - 



and makes this second aspect its own polar opposite, namely as existence for and in Self as 
contrasted with the Universal." 

In the historical development of Spirit there have been three main phases: The Orientals, the 
Greeks and Romans, and the Germans. "The history of the world is the discipline of the 
uncontrolled natural will, bringing it into obedience to a universal principle and conferring 
subjective freedom. The East knew, and to the present day knows, only that One is free; the 
Greek and Roman world, that some are free; the German world kn ows that/4// are free." One 
might have supposed that democracy would be the appropriate form of government where all 
are free, but not so. Democracy and aristocracy alike belong to the stage where some are free, 
despotism to that where one is free, and monarchy to that in which all are free. This is 
connected with the very odd sense in which Hegel uses the word "freedom." For him (and so far 
we may agree) there is no freedom without law; but he tends to convert this, and to argue that 
wherever there is law there is freedom. Thus "freedom," for him, means little more than the 
right to obey the law. 

As might be expected, he assigns the highest role to the Germans in the terrestrial development 
of Spirit. "The German spirit is the spirit of the new world. Its aim is the realization of absolute 
Truth as the unlimited self-determination of freedom — that freedom which has its own absolute 
from itself as its purport." 

This is a very superfine brand of freedom. It does not mean that you will be able to keep out of 
a concentration camp. It does not imply democracy, or a free press, jyor any of the usual Liberal 
watchwords, which Hegel rejects with contempt. When Spirit gives laws to itself, it does so 
freely. To our mundane vision, it may seem that the Spirit that gives laws is embodied in the 
monarch, and the Spirit to which laws are given is embodied in his subjects. But from the point 
of view of the Absolute the distinction between monarch and subjects, like all other 
distinctions, is illusory, and when the monarch imprisons a liberal-minded subject, that is still 
Spirit freely determining itself. Hegel praises Rousseau for distinguishing between the general 
will 


* Freedom of the press, he says, does not consist in being allowed to write what one wants; 
this view is crude and superficial. For instance, the Press should not be allowed to render 
the Government or the Police contemptible. 


- 737 - 


and the will of all. One gathers that the monarch embodies the general will, whereas a 
parliamentary majority only embodies the will of all. A very convenient doctrine. 

German history is divided by Hegel into three periods: the first, up to Charlemagne; the second, 
from Charlemagne to the Reformation; the third, from the Reformation onwards. These three 
periods are distinguished as the Kingdoms of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, 
respectively. It seems a little odd that the Kingdom of the Holy Ghost should have begun with the 
bloody and utterly abominable atrocities committed in suppressing the Peasants' War, but Hegel, 
naturally, does not mention so trivial an incident. Instead, he goes off, as might be expected, into 
praises of Machiavelli. 

Hegel's interpretation of history since the fall of the Roman Empire is partly the effect, and partly 
the cause, of the teaching of world history in German schools. In Italy and France, while there has 
been a romantic admiration of the Germans on the part of a few men such as Tacitus and 
Machiavelli, they have been viewed, in general, as the authors of the "barbarian" invasion, and as 
enemies of the Church, first under the great Emperors, and later as the leaders of the Reformation. 
Until the nineteenth century the Latin nations looked upon the Germans as their inferiors in 
civilization. Protestants in Germany naturally took a different view. They regarded the late 
Romans as effete, and considered the German conquest of the Western Empire an essential step 
towards revivification. In relation to the conflict of Empire and Papacy in the Middle Ages, they 
took a Ghibelline view: to this day, Gennan schoolboys are taught a boundless admiration of 
Charlemagne and Barbarossa. In the times after the Refonnation, the political weakness and 
disunity of Germany was deplored, and the gradual rise of Prussia was welcomed as making 
Germany strong under Protestant leadership, not under the Catholic and somewhat feeble 
leadership of Austria. Hegel, in philosophizing about history, has in mind such men as Theodoric, 
Charlemagne, Barbarossa, Luther, and Frederick the Great. He is to be interpreted in the light of 
their exploits, and in the light of the then recent humiliation of Gennany by Napoleon. 

So much is Germany glorified that one might expect to find it the final embodiment of the 
Absolute Idea, beyond which no further development would be possible. But this is not Hegel’s 
view. On the 


- 738 - 



contrary, he says that America is the land of the future, "where, in the ages that lie before us, the 
burden of the world's history shall reveal itself— perhaps [he adds characteristically] in a contest 
between North and South America." He seems to think that everything important takes the form of 
war. If it were suggested to him that the contribution of America to world history might be the 
development of a society without extreme poverty, he would not be interested. On the contrary, he 
says that, as yet, there is no real State in America, because a real State requires a division of 
classes into rich and poor. 

Nations, in Hegel, play the part that classes play in Marx. The principle of historical development, 
he says, is national genius. In every age, there is some one nation which is charged with the 
mission of carrying the world through the stage of the dialectic that it has reached. In our age, of 
course, this nation is Germany. But in addition to nations, we must also take account of world- 
historical individuals; these are men in whose aims are embodied the dialectical transitions that 
are due to take place in their time. These men are heroes, and may justifiably contravene ordinary 
moral rules. Alexander, Caesar, and Napoleon are given as examples. I doubt whether, in Hegel's 
opinion, a man could be a "hero" without being a military conqueror. 

Hegel's emphasis on nations, together with his peculiar conception of "freedom," explains his 
glorification of the State— a very important aspect of his political philosophy, to which we must 
now turn our attention. His philosophy of the State is developed both in his Philosophy of History 
and in his Philosophy of Law. It is in the main compatible with his general metaphysic, but not 
necessitated by it; at certain points, however— e.g., as regards the relations between States— his 
admiration of the national State is carried so far as to become inconsistent with his general 
preference of wholes to parts. 

Glorification of the State begins, so far as modem times are concerned, with the Reformation. In 
the Roman Empire, the Emperor was deified, and the State thereby acquired a sacred character; 
but the philosophers of the Middle Ages, with few exceptions, were ecclesiastics, and therefore 
put the Church above the State. Luther, finding support in Protestant princes, began the opposite 
practice; the Lutheran Church, on the whole was Erastian. Hobbes, who was politically a 
Protestant, developed the doctrine of the supremacy of the State, and Spinoza, on the whole, 
agreed with him. Rousseau, as 


- 739 - 



we have seen, thought the State should not tolerate other political organizations. Hegel was 
vehemently Protestant, of the Lutheran section; the Prussian State was an Erastian absolute 
monarchy. These reasons would make one expect to find the State highly valued by Hegel, but, 
even so, he goes to lengths which are astonishing. 

We are told in The Philosophy of History that "the State is the actually existing realized moral 
life," and that all the spiritual reality possessed by a human being he possesses only through the 
State. "For his spiritual reality consists in this, that his own essence— Reason— is objectively 
present to him, that it possesses objective immediate existence for him. . . . For truth is the unity 
of the universal and subjective Will, and the universal is to be found in the State, in its laws, its 
universal and rational arrangements. The State is the Divine Idea as its exists on earth." Again: 
"The State is the embodiment of rational freedom, realizing and recognizing itself in an objective 
form. . . . The State is the Idea of Spirit in the external manifestation of human Will and its 
Freedom." 

The Philosophy of Law, in the section on the State, develops the same doctrine somewhat more 
fully. "The State is the reality of the moral idea— the moral spirit, as the visible substantial will, 
evident to itself, which thinks and knows itself, and fulfils what it knows in so far as it knows it." 
The State is the rational in and for itself. If the State existed only for the interests of individuals 
(as Fiberals contend), an individual might or might not be a member of the State. It has, however, 
a quite different relation to the individual: since it is objective Spirit, the individual only has 
objectivity, truth, and morality in so far as he is a member of the State, whose true content and 
purpose is union as such. It is admitted that there may be bad States, but these merely exist, and 
have no true reality, whereas a rational State is infinite in itself. 

It will be seen that Hegel claims for the State much the same position as Saint Augustine and his 
Catholic successors claimed for the Church. There are, however, two respects in which the 
Catholic claim is more reasonable than Hegel's. In the first place, the Church is not a chance 
geographical association, but a body united by a common creed, believed by its members to be of 
supreme importance; it is thus in its very essence the embodiment of what Hegel calls the "Idea." 
In the second place, there is only one Catholic Church, whereas 


- 740 - 



there are many States. When each State, in relation to its subjects, is made as absolute as Hegel 
makes it, there is difficulty in finding any philosophical principle by which to regulate the 
relations between different States. In fact, at this point Hegel abandons his philosophical talk, 
falling back on the state of nature and Hobbes's war of all against all. 

The habit of speaking of "the State," as if there were only one, is misleading so long as there is no 
world State. Duty being, for Hegel, solely a relation of the individual to his State, no principle is 
left by which to moralize the relations between States. This Hegel recognizes. In external 
relations, he says, the State is an individual, and each State is independent as against the others. 
"Since in this independence the being-for-self of real spirit has its existence, it is the first freedom 
and highest honour of a people." He goes on to argue against any sort of League of Nations by 
which the independence of separate States might be limited. The duty of a citizen is entirely 
confined (so far as the external relations of his State are concerned) to upholding the substantial 
individuality and independence and sovereignty of his own State. It follows that war is not wholly 
an evil, or something that we should seek to abolish. The purpose of the State is not merely to 
uphold the life and property of the citizens, and this fact provides the moral justification of war, 
which is not to be regarded as an absolute evil or as accidental, or as having its cause in something 
that ought not to be. 

Hegel does not mean only that, in some situations, a nation cannot rightly avoid going to war. He 
means much more than this. He is opposed to the creation of institutions— such as a world 
government —which would prevent such situations from arising, because he thinks it a good thing 
that there should be wars from time to time. War, he says, is the condition in which we take 
seriously the vanity of temporal goods and things. (This view is to be contrasted with the opposite 
theory, that all wars have economic causes.) War has a positive moral value: "War has the higher 
significance that through it the moral health of peoples is preserved in their indifference towards 
the stabilizing of finite determinations." Peace is ossification; the Holy Alliance, and Kant's 
League for Peace, are mistaken, because a family of States needs an enemy. Conflicts of States 
can only be decided by war; States being towards each other in a state of nature, their relations 


- 741 - 



are not legal or moral. Their rights have their reality in their particular wills, and the interest of 
each State is its own highest law. There is no contrast of morals and politics, because States are 
not subject to ordinary moral laws. 

Such is Hegel's doctrine of the State— a doctrine which, if accepted, justifies every internal tyranny 
and every external aggression that can possibly be imagined. The strength of his bias appears in 
the fact that his theory is largely inconsistent with his own metaphysic, and that the 
inconsistencies are all such as tend to the justification of cruelty and international brigandage. A 
man may be pardoned if logic compels him regretfully to reach conclusions which he deplores, 
but not for departing from logic in order to be free to advocate crimes. Hegel's logic led him to 
believe that there is more reality or excellence (the two for him are synonyms) in wholes than in 
their parts, and that a whole increases in reality and excellence as it becomes more organized. This 
justified him in preferring a State to an anarchic collection of individuals, but it should equally 
have led him to prefer a world State to an anarchic collection of States. Within the State, his 
general philosophy should have led him to feel more respect for the individual than he did feel, for 
the wholes of which his Logic treats are not like the One of Parmenides, or even like Spinoza's 
God: they are wholes in which the individual does not disappear, but acquires fuller reality 
through his harmonious relation to a larger organism. A State in which the individual is ignored is 
not a smallscale model of the Hegelian Absolute. 

Nor is there any good reason, in Hegel's metaphysic, for the exclusive emphasis on the State, as 
opposed to other social organizations. I can see nothing but Protestant bias in his preference of the 
State to the Church. Moreover, if it is good that society should be as organic as possible, as Hegel 
believes, then many social organizations are necessary, in addition to the State and the Church. It 
should follow from Hegel's principles that every interest which is not harmful to the community, 
and which can be promoted by cooperation, should have its appropriate organization, and that 
every such organization should have its quota of limited independence. It may be objected that 
ultimate authority must reside somewhere, and cannot reside elsewhere than in the State. But even 
so it may be desirable that this 


- 742 - 



ultimate authority should not be irresistible when it attempts to be oppressive beyond a point. 


This brings us to a question which is fundamental in judging Hegel's whole philosophy. Is there 
more reality, and is there more value, in a whole than in its parts? Hegel answers both questions in 
the affirmative. The question of reality is metaphysical, the question of value is ethical. They are 
commonly treated as if they were scarcely distinguishable, but to my mind it is important to keep 
them apart. Let us begin with the metaphysical question. 

The view of Hegel, and of many other philosophers, is that the character of any portion of the 
universe is so profoundly affected by its relations to the other parts and to the whole, that no true 
statement can be made about any part except to assign its place in the whole. Since its place in the 
whole depends upon all the other parts, a true statement about its place in the whole will at the 
same time assign the place of every other part in the whole. Thus there can be only one true 
statement; there is no truth except the whole truth. And similarly nothing is quite real except the 
whole, for any part, when isolated, is changed in character by being isolated, and therefore no 
longer appears quite what it truly is. On the other hand, when a part is viewed in relation to the 
whole, as it should be, it is seen to be not self-subsistent, and to be incapable of existing except as 
part of just that whole which alone is truly real. This is the metaphysical doctrine. 

The ethical doctrine, which maintains that value resides in the whole rather than in the parts, must 
be true if the metaphysical doctrine is true, but need not be false if the metaphysical doctrine is 
false. It may, moreover, be true of some wholes and not of others. It is obviously true, in some 
sense, of a living body. The eye is worthless when separated from the body; a collection of 
disjecta membra, even when complete, has not the value that once belonged to the body from 
which they were taken. Hegel conceives the ethical relation of the citizen to the State as analogous 
to that of the eye to the body: in his place the citizen is part of a valuable whole, but isolated he is 
as useless as an isolated eye. The analogy, however, is open to question; from the ethical 
importance of some wholes, that of all wholes does not follow. 

The above statement of the ethical problem is defective in one im- 


- 743 - 



portant respect, namely, that it does not take account of the distinction between ends and means. 
An eye in a living body is useful, that is to say, it has value as a means; but it has no more 
intrinsic value than when detached from the body. A thing has intrinsic value when it is prized for 
its own sake, not as a means to something else. We value the eye as a means to seeing. Seeing 
may be a means or an end; it is a means when it shows us food or enemies, it is an end when it 
shows us something that we find beautiful. The State is obviously valuable as a means: it protects 
us against thieves and murderers, it provides roads and schools, and so on. It may, of course, also 
be bad as a means, for example by waging an unjust war. The real question we have to ask in 
connection with Hegel is not this, but whether the State is good per se, as an end: do the citizens 
exist for the sake of the State, or the State for the sake of the citizens? Hegel holds the former 
view; the liberal philosophy that comes from Locke holds the latter. It is clear that we shall only 
attribute intrinsic value to the State if we think of it as having a life of its own, as being in some 
sense a person. At this point, Hegel's metaphysic becomes relevant to the question of value. A 
person is a complex whole, having a single life; can there be a super-person, composed of persons 
as the body is composed of organs, and having a single life which is not the sum of the lives of the 
component persons? If there can be such a super-person, as Hegel thinks, then the State may be 
such a being, and it may be as superior to ourselves as the whole body is to the eye. But if we 
think this super-person a mere metaphysical monstrosity, then we shall say that the intrinsic value 
of a community is derived from that of its members, and that the State is a means, not an end. We 
are thus brought back from the ethical to the metaphysical question. The metaphysical question 
itself, we shall find, is really a question of logic. 

The question at issue is much wider than the truth or falsehood of Hegel's philosophy; it is the 
question that divides the friends of analysis from its enemies. Let us take an illustration. Suppose I 
say "John is the father of James." Hegel, and all who believe in what Marshal Smuts calls 
"holism," will say: "Before you can understand this statement, you must know who John and 
James are. Now to know who John is, is to know all his characteristics, for apart from them he 
would not be distinguishable from any one else. But all his characteristics involve other people or 
things. He is characterized by 


- 744 - 



his relations to his parents, his wife, and his children, by whether he is a good or a bad citizen, and 
by the country to which he belongs. All these things you must know before you can be said to 
know whom the word ’John’ refers to. Step by step, in your endeavour to say what you mean by 
the word ’John,’ you will be led to take account of the whole universe, and your original statement 
will turn out to be telling you something about the universe, not about two separate people, John 
and James." 

Now this is all very well, but it is open to an initial objection. If the above argument were sound, 
how could knowledge ever begin? I know numbers of propositions of the form "A is the father of 
B," but I do not know the whole universe. If all knowledge were knowledge of the universe as a 
whole, there would be no knowledge. This is enough to make us suspect a mistake somewhere. 

The fact is that, in order to use the word "John" correctly and intelligently, I do not need to know 
all about John, but only enough to recognize him. No doubt he has relations, near or remote, to 
everything in the universe, but he can be spoken of truly without taking them into account, except 
such as are the direct subject-matter of what is being said. He may be the father of Jemima as well 
as of James, but it is not necessary for me to know this in order to know that he is the father of 
James. If Hegel were right, we could not state fully what is meant by "John is the father of James" 
without mentioning Jemima: we ought to say "John, the father of Jemima, is the father of James." 
This would still be inadequate; we should have to go on to mention his parents and grandparents, 
and a whole Who's Who. But this lands us in absurdities. The Hegelian position might be stated as 
follows: "The word 'John' means all that is true of John." But as a definition this is circular, since 
the word "John" occurs in the defining phrase. In fact, if Hegel were right, no word could begin to 
have a meaning, since we should need to know already the meanings of all other words in order to 
state all the properties of what the word designates, which, according to the theory, are what the 
word means. 

To put the matter abstractly: we must distinguish properties of different kinds. A thing may have a 
property not involving any other thing; this sort is called a quality. Or it may have a property 
involving one other thing; such a property is being married. Or it may have one involving two 
other things, such as being a brother-in-law. If a 


- 745 - 



certain thing has a certain collection of qualities, and no other thing has just this collection of 
qualities, then it can be defined as "the thing having such-and-such qualities." From its having 
these qualities, nothing can be deduced by pure logic as to its relational properties. Hegel thought 
that, if enough was known about a thing to distinguish it from all other things, then all its 
properties could be inferred by logic. This was a mistake, and from this mistake arose the whole 
imposing edifice of his system. This illustrates an important truth, namely, that the worse your 
logic, the more interesting the consequences to which it gives rise. 

CHAPTER XXIII Byron 

THE nineteenth century, in comparison with the present age, appears rational, progressive, and 
satisfied; yet the opposite qualities of our time were possessed by many of the most remarkable 
men during the epoch of liberal optimism. When we consider men, not as artists or discoverers, 
not as sympathetic or antipathetic to our own tastes, but as forces, as causes of change in the social 
structure, in judgements of value, or in intellectual outlook, we find that the course of events in 
recent times has necessitated much readjustment in our estimates, making some men less 
important than they had seemed, and others more so. Among those whose importance is greater 
than it seemed, Byron deserves a high place. On the Continent, such a view would not appear 
surprising, but in the Englishspeaking world it may be thought strange. It was on the Continent 
that Byron was influential, and it is not in England that his spiritual progeny is to be sought. To 
most of us, his verse seems often poor and his sentiment often tawdry, but abroad his way of 
feeling and his outlook on life were transmitted and developed and transmuted until they became 
so wide-spread as to be factors in great events. 

- 746 - 



The aristocratic rebel, of whom Byron was in his day the exemplar, is a very different type from 
the leader of a peasant or proletarian revolt. Those who are hungry have no need of an elaborate 
philosophy to stimulate or excuse discontent, and anything of the kind appears to them merely an 
amusement of the idle rich. They want what others have, not some intangible and metaphysical 
good. Though they may preach Christian love, as the medieval communist rebels did, their real 
reasons for doing so are very simple: that the lack of it in the rich and powerful causes the 
sufferings of the poor, and that the presence of it among comrades in revolt is thought essential to 
success. But experience of the struggle leads to a despair of the power of love, leaving naked hate 
as the driving force. A rebel of this type, if, like Marx, he invents a philosophy, invents one solely 
designed to demonstrate the ultimate victory of his party, not one concerned with values. His 
values remain primitive: the good is enough to eat, and the rest is talk. No hungry man is likely to 
think otherwise. 

The aristocratic rebel, since he has enough to eat, must have other causes of discontent. I do not 
include among rebels the mere leaders of factions temporarily out of power; I include only men 
whose philosophy requires some greater change than their own personal success. It may be that 
love of power is the underground source of their discontent, but in their conscious thought there is 
criticism of the government of the world, which, when it goes deep enough, takes the form of 
Titanic cosmic self-assertion, or, in those who retain some superstition, of Satanism. Both are to 
be found in Byron. Both, largely through men whom he influenced, became common in large 
sections of society which could hardly be deemed aristocratic. The aristocratic philosophy of 
rebellion, growing, developing, and changing as it approached maturity, has inspired a long series 
of revolutionary movements, from the Carbonari after the fall of Napoleon to Hitler's coup in 
1933; and at each stage it has inspired a corresponding manner of thought and feeling among 
intellectuals and artists. 

It is obvious that an aristocrat does not become a rebel unless his temperament and circumstances 
are in some way peculiar. Byron's circumstances were very peculiar. His earliest recollections 
were of his parents’ quarrels; his mother was a woman whom he feared for her cruelty and 
despised for her vulgarity; his nurse combined wickedness with the strictest Calvinist theology; 
his lameness filled him 


- 747 - 



with shame, and prevented him from being one of the herd at school. At ten years old, after living 
in poverty, he suddenly found himself a Lord and the owner of Newstead. His great-uncle the 
"wicked Lord," from whom he inherited, had killed a man in a duel thirtythree years ago, and been 
ostracized by his neighbours ever since. The Byrons had been a lawless family, and the Gordons, 
his mother's ancestors, even more so. After the squalor of a back street in Aberdeen, the boy 
naturally rejoiced in his title and his Abbey, and was willing to take on the character of his 
ancestors in gratitude for their lands. And if, in recent years, their bellicosity had led them into 
trouble, he leamt that in former centuries it had brought them renown. One of his earliest poems, 
"On Leaving Newstead Abbey, " relates his emotions at this time, which are of admiration for his 
ancestors who fought in the crusades, at Crecy, and at Marston Moor. He ends with the pious 
resolve: 

Like you will he live, or like you will he perish: When decay'd, may he mingle his dust with your 
own. 

This is not the mood of a rebel, but it suggests "Childe" Harold, the modem peer who imitates 
medieval barons. As an undergraduate, when for the first time he had an income of his own, he 
wrote that he felt as independent as "a Gennan Prince who coins his own cash, or a Cherokee 
Chief who coins no cash at all, but enjoys what is more precious, Liberty. I speak in raptures of 
that Goddess because my amiable Mama was so despotic." He wrote, in later life, much noble 
verse in praise of freedom, but it must be understood that the freedom he praised was that of a 
German Prince or a Cherokee Chief, not the inferior sort that might conceivably be enjoyed by 
ordinary mortals. 

In spite of his lineage and his title, his aristocratic relations fought shy of him, and he was made to 
feel himself socially not of their society. His mother was intensely disliked, and he was looked on 
with suspicion. He knew that she was vulgar, and darkly feared a similar defect in himself. Hence 
arose that peculiar blend of snobbery and rebellion that characterized him. If he could not be a 
gentleman in the modem style, he would be a bold baron in the style of his crusading ancestors, or 
perhaps in the more ferocious but even more romantic style of the Ghibelline chiefs, cursed of 
God and Man as 


- 748 - 



they trampled their way to splendid downfall. Medieval romances and histories were his etiquette 
books. He sinned like the Hohenstaufen, and like the crusaders he died fighting the Moslem. 

His shyness and sense of friendlessness made him look for comfort in love-affairs, but as he was 
unconsciously seeking a mother rather than a mistress, all disappointed him except Augusta. 
Calvinism, which he never shook off— to Shelley, in 1816, he described himself as "Methodist, 
Calvinist, Augustinian"— made him feel that his manner of life was wicked; but wickedness, he 
told himself, was a hereditary curse in his blood, an evil fate to which he was predestined by the 
Almighty. If that were indeed the case, since he must be remarkable, he would be remarkable as a 
sinner, and would dare transgressions beyond the courage of the fashionable libertines whom he 
wished to despise. He loved Augusta genuinely because she was of his blood-of the Ishmaelite 
race of the Byrons— and also, more simply, because she had an elder sister's kindly care for his 
daily welfare. But this was not all that she had to offer him. Through her simplicity and her 
obliging good-nature, she became the means of providing him with the most delicious self- 
congratulatory remorse. He could feel himself the equal of the greatest sinners— the peer of 
Manfred, of Cain, almost of Satan himself. The Calvinist, the aristocrat, and the rebel were all 
equally satisfied; and so was the romantic lover, whose heart was broken by the loss of the only 
earthly being still capable of rousing in it the gentler emotions of pity and love. 

Byron, though he felt himself the equal of Satan, never quite ventured to put himself in the place 
of God. This next step in the growth of pride was taken by Nietzsche, who says: "If there were 
Gods, how could I endure it to be not God! Therefore there are no Gods." Observe the suppressed 
premiss of this reasoning: "Whatever humbles my pride is to be judged false." Nietzsche, like 
Byron, and even to a greater degree, had a pious upbringing, but having a better intellect, he found 
a better escape than Satanism. He remained, however, very sympathetic to Byron. He says: 

"The tragedy is that we cannot believe the dogmas of religion and metaphysics if we have the 
strict methods of truth in heart and head, but on the other hand we have become through the 
development of humanity so tenderly sensitively suffering that we need the highest kind of means 
of salvation and consolation: whence arises the danger 


- 749 - 



that man may bleed to death through the truth that he recognizes." Byron expresses this in 
immortal lines: 

Sorrow is knowledge: they who know the most Must mourn the deepest o’er the fatal truth, The 
Tree of Knowledge is not that of Life. 

Sometimes, though rarely, Byron approaches more nearly to Nietzsche's point of view. But in 
general Byron's ethical theory, as opposed to his practice, remains strictly conventional. 

The great man, to Nietzsche, is godlike; to Byron, usually, a Titan at war with himself. 

Sometimes, however, he portrays a sage not unlike Zarathustra— the Corsair, in his dealings with 
his followers, 

Still sways their souls with that commanding art That dazzles, leads, yet chills the vulgar heart. 

And this same hero "hated man too much to feel remorse." A footnote assures us that the Corsair 
is true to human nature, since similar traits were exhibited by Genseric, king of the Vandals, by 
Ezzelino the Ghibelline tyrant, and by a certain Louisiana pirate. 

Byron was not obliged to confine himself to the Levant and the Middle Ages in his search for 
heroes, since it was not difficult to invest Napoleon with a romantic mantle. The influence of 
Napoleon on the imagination of nineteenth-century Europe was very profound; he inspired 
Clausewitz, Stendhal, Heine, the thought of Fichte and Nietzsche, and the acts of Italian patriots. 
His ghost stalks through the age, the only force which is strong enough to stand up against 
industrialism and commerce, pouring scorn on pacifism and shopkeeping. Tolstoy's War and 
Peace is an attempt to exorcize the ghost, but a vain one, for the spectre has never been more 
powerful than at the present day. 

During the Hundred Days, Byron proclaimed his wish for Napoleon's victory, and when he heard 
of Waterloo he said, "I'm damned sorry for it." Only once, for a moment, did he turn against his 
hero: in 1814, when (so he thought) suicide would have been more seemly than abdication. At this 
moment, he sought consolation in the virtue of Washington, but the return from Elba made this 
effort no longer necessary. In France, when Byron died, "It was remarked in many newspapers that 
the two greatest men of the century, Napoleon and 


- 750 - 



Byron, had disappeared almost at the same time." f_Carlyle, who, at the time, considered Byron 
"the noblest spirit in Europe," and felt as if he had "lost a brother," came afterwards to prefer 
Goethe, but still coupled Byron with Napoleon: 

"For your nobler minds, the publishing of some such Work of Art, in one or the other dialect, 
becomes almost a necessity. For what is it properly but an altercation with the Devil, before you 
begin honestly Fighting him? Your Byron publishes his Sorrows of Lord George, in verse and 
in prose, and copiously otherwise: your Bonaparte presents his Sorrows of Napoleon Opera, in 
an all-too stupendous style; with music of cannon-volleys, and murder- shrieks of a world; his 
stage-lights are the fires of Conflagration; his rhyme and recitative are the tramp of embattled 

Hosts and the sound of falling Cities." — 

It is true that, three chapters further on, he gives the emphatic command: "Close thy Byron; 
open thy Goethe." But Byron was in his blood, whereas Goethe remained an aspiration. 

To Carlyle, Goethe and Byron were antitheses; to Alfred de Musset, they were accomplices in 
the wicked work of instilling the poison of melancholy into the cheerful Gallic soul. Most 
young Frenchmen of that age knew Goethe, it seems, only through The Sorrows of Werther, and 
not at all as the Olympian. Musset blamed Byron for not being consoled by the Adriatic and 
Countess Guiccioli— wrongly, for after he knew her he wrote no more Manfreds. But Don Juan 
was as little read in France as Goethe's more cheerful poetry. In spite of Musset, most French 
poets, ever since, have found Byronic unhappiness the best material for their verses. 

To Musset, it was only after Napoleon that Byron and Goethe were the greatest geniuses of the 
century. Bom in 1810, Musset was one of the generation whom he describes as "conA§us entre 
deux batailles" in a lyrical description of the glories and disasters of the Empire. In Germany, 
feeling about Napoleon was more divided. There were those who, like Heine, saw him as the 
mighty missionary of liberalism, the destroyer of serfdom, the enemy of legitimacy, the man 
who made hereditary princelings tremble; there were others who saw him as Antichrist, the 
would-be destroyer of the noble German nation, 


* Maurois, Life of Byron. 
a 

c Sartor Resartus, Book II, Ch. VI. 


- 751 - 


the immoralist who had proved once for all that Teutonic virtue can only be preserved by 
unquenchable hatred of France. Bismarck effected a synthesis: Napoleon remained Antichrist, but 
an Antichrist to be imitated, not merely to be abhorred. Nietzsche, who accepted the compromise, 
remarked with ghoulish joy that the classical age of war is coming, and that we owe this boon, not 
to the French Revolution, but to Napoleon. And in this way nationalism, Satanism, and hero- 
worship, the legacy of Byron, became part of the complex soul of Gennany. 

Byron is not gentle, but violent like a thunderstorm. What he says of Rousseau is applicable to 
himself. Rousseau was, he says, 

He who threw Enchantment over passion, and from woe Wrung overwhelming eloquence . . . 

yet he knew How to make madness beautiful, and cast O’er erring deeds and thoughts, a heavenly 
hue. 

But there is a profound difference between the two men. Rousseau is pathetic, Byron is fierce; 
Rousseau's timidity is obvious, Byron’s is concealed; Rousseau admires virtue provided it is 
simple, while Byron admires sin provided it is elemental. The difference, though it is only that 
between two stages in the revolt of unsocial instincts, is important, and shows the direction in 
which the movement is developing. 

Byron's romanticism, it must be confessed, was only half sincere. At times, he would say that 
Pope's poetry was better than his own, but this judgement, also, was probably only what he 
thought in certain moods. The world insisted on simplifying him, and omitting the element of 
pose in his cosmic despair and professed contempt for mankind. Like many other prominent men, 
he was more important as a myth than as he really was. As a myth, his importance, especially on 
the Continent, was enonnous. 


- 752 - 



CHAPTER XXIV Schopenhauer 


SCHOPENHAUER ( 1788-1860) is in many ways peculiar among philosophers. He is a 
pessimist, whereas almost all the others are in some sense optimists. He is not fully academic, like 
Kant and Hegel, nor yet completely outside the academic tradition. He dislikes Christianity, 
preferring the religions of India, both Hinduism and Buddhism. He is a man of wide culture, quite 
as much interested in art as in ethics. He is unusually free from nationalism, and as much at home 
with English and French writers as with those of his own country. His appeal has always been less 
to professional philosophers than to artistic and literary people in search of a philosophy that they 
could believe. He began the emphasis on Will which is characteristic of much nineteenth- and 
twentieth-century philosophy; but for him Will, though metaphysically fundamental, is ethically 
evil— an opposition only possible for a pessimist. He acknowledges three sources of his 
philosophy, Kant, Plato, and the Upanishads, but I do not think he owes as much to Plato as he 
thinks he does. His outlook has a certain temperamental affinity with that of the Hellenistic age; it 
is tired and valetudinarian, valuing peace more than victory, and quietism more than attempts at 
reform, which he regards as inevitably futile. 

Both his parents belonged to prominent commercial families in Danzig, where he was bom. His 
father was a Voltairian, who regarded England as the land of liberty and intelligence. In common 
with most of the leading citizens of Danzig, he hated the encroachments of Prussia on the 
independence of the free city, and was indignant when it was annexed to Prussia in 1793 -so 
indignant that he removed to Hamburg, at considerable pecuniary loss. Schopenhauer lived there 
with his father from 1793 to 1797; then he spent two years in Paris, at the end of which his father 
was pleased to find that the 


- 753 - 



boy had nearly forgotten German. In 1803 he was put in a boardingschool in England, where he 
hated the cant and hypocrisy. Two years later, to please his father, he became a clerk in a 
commercial house in Hamburg, but he loathed the prospect of a business career, and longed for a 
literary and academic life. This was made possible by his father’s death, probably by suicide; his 
mother was willing that he should abandon commerce for school and university. It might be 
supposed that he would, in consequence, have preferred her to his father, but the exact opposite 
happened: he disliked his mother, and retained an affectionate memory of his father. 

Schopenhauer's mother was a lady of literary aspirations, who settled in Weimar two weeks before 
the battle of Jena. There she kept a literary salon, wrote books, and enjoyed friendships with men 
of culture. She had little affection for her son, and a keen eye for his faults. She warned him 
against bombast and empty pathos; he was annoyed by her philanderings. When he came of age he 
inherited a modest competence; after this, he and his mother gradually found each other more and 
more intolerable. His low opinion of women is no doubt due, at least in part, to his quarrels with 
his mother. 

Already at Hamburg he had come under the influence of the romantics, especially Tieck, Novalis, 
and Hoffmann, from whom he leamt to admire Greece and to think ill of the Hebraic elements in 
Christianity. Another romantic, Friedrich Schlegel, confirmed him in his admiration of Indian 
philosophy. In the year in which he came of age ( 1809), he went to the university of GA]|ttingen, 
where he learnt to admire Kant. Two years later he went to Berlin, where he studied mainly 
science; he heard Fichte lecture, but despised him. He remained indifferent throughout the 
excitement of the war of liberation. In 1819 he became a Privatdozent at Berlin, and had the 
conceit to put his lectures at the same hour as Hegel's; having failed to lure away Hegel's hearers, 
he soon ceased to lecture. In the end he settled down to the life of an old bachelor in Dresden. He 
kept a poodle named Atma (the world-soul), walked two hours every day, smoked a long pipe, 
read the London Times, and employed correspondents to hunt up evidences of his fame. He was 
anti-democratic, and hated the revolution of 1848; he believed in spiritualism and magic; in his 
study he had a bust of Kant and a bronze Buddha. In his manner of life he tried to imitate Kant 
except as regards early rising. 


- 754 - 



His principal work, The World as Will and Idea, was published at the end of 1818. He believed it 
to be of great importance, and went so far as to say that some paragraphs in it had been dictated by 
the Holy Ghost. To his great mortification, it fell completely flat. In 1844 he persuaded the 
publisher to bring out a second edition; but it was not till some years later that he began to receive 
some of the recognition for which he longed. 

Schopenhauer's system is an adaptation of Kant's, but one that emphasizes quite different aspects 
of the Critique from those emphasized by Fichte or Hegel. They got rid of the thing-in-itself, and 
thus made knowledge metaphysically fundamental. Schopenhauer retained the thing-in-itself, but 
identified it with will. He held that what appears to perception as my body is really my will. There 
was more to be said for this view as a development of Kant than most Kantians were willing to 
recognize. Kant had maintained that a study of the moral law can take us behind phenomena, and 
give us knowledge which sense-perception cannot give; he also maintained that the moral law is 
essentially concerned with the will. The difference between a good man and a bad man is, for 
Kant, a difference in the world of thingsin-themselves, and is also a difference as to volitions. It 
follows that, for Kant, volitions must belong to the real world, not to the world of phenomena. 

The phenomenon corresponding to a volition is a bodily movement; that is why, according to 
Schopenhauer, the body is the appearance of which will is the reality. 

But the will which is behind phenomena cannot consist of a number of different volitions. Both 
time and space, according to Kant— and in this Schopenhauer agrees with him— belong only to 
phenomena; the thing-in-itself is not in space or time. My will, therefore, in the sense in which it 
is real, cannot be dated, nor can it be composed of separate acts of will, because it is space and 
time that are the source of plurality— the "principle of individuation," to use the scholastic phrase 
which Schopenhauer prefers. My will, therefore, is one and timeless. Nay, more, it is to be 
identified with the will of the whole universe; my separateness is an illusion, resulting from my 
subjective apparatus of spatio-temporal perception. What is real is one vast will, appearing in the 
whole course of nature, animate and inanimate alike. 

So far, we might expect Schopenhauer to identify his cosmic will with God, and teach a 
pantheistic doctrine not unlike Spinoza's, in 


- 755 - 



which virtue would consist in conformity to the divine will. But at this point his pessimism leads 
to a different development. The cosmic will is wicked; will, altogether, is wicked, or at any rate is 
the source of all our endless suffering. Suffering is essential to all life, and is increased by every 
increase of knowledge. Will has no fixed end, which if achieved would bring contentment. 
Although death must conquer in the end, we pursue our futile purposes, "as we blow out a soap- 
bubble as long and as large as possible, although we know perfectly well that it will burst." There 
is no such thing as happiness, for an unfulfilled wish causes pain, and attainment brings only 
satiety. Instinct urges men to procreation, which brings into existence a new occasion for suffering 
and death; that is why shame is associated with the sexual act. Suicide is useless; the doctrine of 
transmigration, even if not literally true, conveys truth in the fonn of a myth. 

All this is very sad, but there is a way out, and it was discovered in India. 

The best of myths is that of Nirvana (which Schopenhauer interprets as extinction). This, he 
agrees, is contrary to Christian doctrine, but "the ancient wisdom of the human race will not be 
displaced by what happened in Galilee." The cause of suffering is intensity of will; the less we 
exercise will, the less we shall suffer. And here knowledge turns out to be useful after all, 
provided it is knowledge of a certain sort. The distinction between one man and another is part of 
the phenomenal world, and disappears when the world is seen truly. To the good man, the veil of 
Maya (illusion) has become transparent; he sees that all things are one, and that the distinction 
between himself and another is only apparent. He reaches this insight by love, which is always 
sympathy, and has to do with the pain of others. When the veil of Maya is lifted, a man takes on 
the suffering of the whole world. In the good man, knowledge of the whole quiets all volition; his 
will turns away from life and denies his own nature. "There arises within him a horror of the 
nature of which his own phenomenal existence is an expression, the kernel and inner nature of 
that world which is recognized as full of misery." 

Hence Schopenhauer is led to complete agreement, at least as regards practice, with ascetic 
mysticism. Eckhard and Angelus Silesius are better than the New Testament. There are some good 
things in orthodox Christianity, notably the doctrine of original sin as preached, 


- 756 - 



against "the vulgar Pelagianism," by Saint Augustine and Luther; but the Gospels are sadly 
deficient in metaphysics. Buddhism, he says, is the highest religion; and his ethical doctrines are 
orthodox throughout Asia, except where the "detestable doctrine of Islam" prevails. 

The good man will practise complete chastity, voluntary poverty, fasting, and self-torture. In all 
things he will aim at breaking down his individual will. But he does not do this, as do the Western 
mystics, to achieve harmony with God; no such positive good is sought. The good that is sought is 
wholly and entirely negative: 

"We must banish the dark impression of that nothingness which we discern behind all virtue and 
holiness as their final goal, and which we fear as children fear the dark; we must not even evade it 
like the Indians, through myths and meaningless words, such as reabsorption in Brahma or the 
Nirvana of the Buddhists. Rather do we freely acknowledge that what remains after the entire 
abolition of win is for all those who are still full of will certainly nothing; but, conversely, to those 
in whom the will has turned and has denied itself, this our world, which is so real, with all its suns 
and milky ways— is nothing." 

There is a vague suggestion here that the saint sees something positive which other men do not 
see, but there is nowhere a hint as to what this is, and I think the suggestion is only rhetorical. The 
world and all its phenomena, Schopenhauer says, are only the objectification of will. With the 
surrender of the will, 

". . . all those phenomena are also abolished; that constant strain and effort without end and 
without rest at all the grades of objectivity, in which and through which the world consists; the 
multifarious forms succeeding each other in gradation; the whole manifestation of the will; and, 
finally, also the universal forms of this manifestation, time and space, and also its last 
fundamental form, subject and object; all are abolished. No will: no idea, no world. Before us 
there is certainly only nothingness." 

We cannot interpret this except as meaning that the saint's purpose is to come as near as possible 
to non-existence, which, for some reason never clearly explained, he cannot achieve by suicide. 
Why the saint is to be preferred to a man who is always drunk is not very easy to see; perhaps 
Schopenhauer thought the sober moments were bound to be sadly frequent. 

Schopenhauer's gospel of resignation is not very consistent and not 


- 757 - 



very sincere. The mystics to whom he appeals believed in contemplation; in the Beatific Vision 
the most profound kind of knowledge was to be achieved, and this kind of knowledge was the 
supreme good. Ever since Parmenides, the delusive knowledge of appearance was contrasted 
with another kind of knowledge, not with something of a wholly different kind. Christianity 
teaches that in knowledge of God standeth our eternal life. But Schopenhauer will have none of 
this. He agrees that what commonly passes for knowledge belongs to the realm of Maya, but 
when we pierce the veil, we behold not God, but Satan, the wicked omnipotent will, perpetually 
busied in weaving a web of suffering for the torture of its creatures. Terrified by the Diabolic 
Vision, the sage cries "Avaunt!" and seeks refuge in non-existence. It is an insult to the mystics 
to claim them as believers in this mythology. And the suggestion that, without achieving 
complete non-existence, the sage may yet live a life having some value, is not possible to 
reconcile with Schopenhauer's pessimism. So long as the sage exists, he exists because he 
retains will, which is evil. He may diminish the quantity of evil by weakening his will, but he 
can never acquire any positive good. 

Nor is the doctrine sincere, if we may judge by Schopenhauer's life. He habitually dined well, at 
a good restaurant; he had many trivial love-affairs, which were sensual but not passionate; he 
was exceedingly quarrelsome and unusually avaricious. On one occasion he was annoyed by an 
elderly seamstress who was talking to a friend outside the door of his apartment. He threw her 
downstairs, causing her pennanent injury. She obtained a court order compelling him to pay her 
a certain sum (15 thalers) every quarter as long as she lived. When at last she died, after twenty 
years, he noted in his accountbook: "Obit anus, abit onus."* It is hard to find in his life 
evidences of any virtue except kindness to animals, which he carried to the point of objecting to 
vivisection in the interests of science. In all other respects he was completely selfish. It is 
difficult to believe that a man who was profoundly convinced of the virtue of asceticism and 
resignation would never have made any attempt to embody his convictions in his practice. 

Historically, two things are important about Schopenhauer: his 


* "The old woman dies, the burden departs." 


- 758 - 



pessimism, and his doctrine that will is superior to knowledge. His pessimism made it possible for 
men to take to philosophy without having to persuade themselves that all evil can be explained 
away, and in this way, as an antidote, it was useful. From a scientific point of view, optimism and 
pessimism are alike objectionable: optimism assumes, or attempts to prove, that the universe 
exists to please us, and pessimism that it exists to displease us. Scientifically, there is no evidence 
that it is concerned with us either one way or the other. The belief in either pessimism or optimism 
is a matter of temperament, not of reason, but the optimistic temperament has been much 
commoner among Western philosophers. A representative of the opposite party is therefore likely 
to be useful in bringing forward considerations which would otherwise be overlooked. 

More important than pessimism was the doctrine of the primacy of the will. It is obvious that this 
doctrine has no necessary logical connection with pessimism, and those who held it after 
Schopenhauer frequently found in it a basis for optimism. In one fonn or another, the doctrine that 
will is paramount has been held by many modern philosophers, notably Nietzsche, Bergson, 

James, and Dewey. It has, moreover, acquired a vogue outside the circles of professional 
philosophers. And in proportion as will has gone up in the scale, knowledge has gone down. This 
is, I think, the most notable change that has come over the temper of philosophy in our age. It was 
prepared by Rousseau and Kant, but was first proclaimed in its purity by Schopenhauer. For this 
reason, in spite of inconsistency and a certain shallowness, his philosophy has considerable 
importance as a stage in historical development. 

-759- 

CHAPTER XXV Nietzsche 

NIETZSCHE ( 1844-1900) regarded himself, rightly, as the successor of Schopenhauer, to whom, 
however, he is superior in many ways, particularly in the consistency and coherence of his 
doctrine. Schopenhauer's oriental ethic of renunciation seems out of hannony with his metaphysic 
of the omnipotence of will; in Nietzsche, the will has ethical as well as metaphysical primacy. 
Nietzsche, though a professor, was a literary rather than an academic philosopher. He invented no 
new technical theories in ontology or epistemology; his importance is primarily in ethics, and 
secondarily as an acute historical critic. I shall confine myself almost entirely to his ethics and his 
criticism of religion, since it was this aspect of his writing that made him influential. 

His life was simple. His father was a Protestant pastor, and his upbringing was very pious. He was 
brilliant at the university as a classicist and student of philology, so much so that in 1869, before 
he had taken his degree, he was offered a professorship of philology at Basel, which he accepted. 
His health was never good, and after periods of sick leave he was obliged to retire finally in 1879. 
After this, he lived in health resorts in Switzerland; in 1888 he became insane, and remained so 
until his death. He had a passionate admiration for Wagner, but quarrelled with him, nominally 
over Parsifal, which he thought too Christian and too full of renunciation. After the quarrel he 
criticized Wagner savagely, and even went so far as to accuse him of being a Jew. His general 
outlook, however, remained very similar to that of Wagner in the Ring; Nietzsche's superman is 
very like Siegfried, except that he knows Greek. This may seem odd, but that is not my fault. 

Nietzsche was not consciously a romantic; indeed he often severely criticizes the romantics. 
Consciously his outlook was Hellenic, but 


- 760 - 



with the Orphic component omitted. He admired the pre-Socratics, except Pythagoras. He has a 
close affinity to Heraclitus. Aristotle's magnanimous man is very like what Nietzsche calls the 
"noble man," but in the main he regards the Greek philosophers from Socrates onwards as inferior 
to their predecessors. He cannot forgive Socrates for his humble origin; he calls him a " roturier 
and accuses him of corrupting the noble Athenian youth with a democratic moral bias. Plato, 
especially, is condemned on account of his taste for edification. Nietzsche, however, obviously 
does not quite like condemning him, and suggests, to excuse him, that perhaps he was insincere, 
and only preached virtue as a means of keeping the lower classes in order. He speaks of him on 
one occasion as "a great Cagliostro." He likes Democritus and Epicurus, but his affection for the 
latter seems somewhat illogical, unless it is interpreted as really an admiration for Lucretius. 

As might be expected, he has a low opinion of Kant, whom he calls "a moral fanatic A la 
Rousseau ." 

In spite of Nietzsche's criticism of the romantics, his outlook owes much to them; it is that of 
aristocratic anarchism, like Byron's, and one is not surprised to find him admiring Byron. He 
attempts to combine two sets of values which are not easily harmonized: on the one hand he likes 
ruthlessness, war, and aristocratic pride; on the other hand, he loves philosophy and literature and 
the arts, especially music. Historically, these values coexisted in the Renaissance; Pope Julius II, 
fighting for Bologna and employing Michelangelo, might be taken as the sort of man whom 
Nietzsche would wish to see in control of governments. It is natural to compare Nietzsche with 
Machiavelli, in spite of important differences between the two men. As for the differences: 
Machiavelli was a man of affairs, whose opinions had been formed by close contact with public 
business, and were in harmony with his age; he was not pedantic or systematic, and his philosophy 
of politics scarcely forms a coherent whole; Nietzsche, on the contrary, was a professor, an 
essentially bookish man, and a philosopher in conscious opposition to what appeared to be the 
dominant political and ethical trends of his time. The similarities, however, go deeper. Nietzsche's 
political philosophy is analogous to that of The Prince (not The Discourses ), though it is worked 
out and applied over a 


- 761 - 



wider field. Both Nietzsche and Machiavelli have an ethic which aims at power and is 
deliberately anti-Christian, though Nietzsche is more frank in this respect. What Caesar Borgia 
was to Machiavelli, Napoleon was to Nietzsche: a great man defeated by petty opponents. 

Nietzsche's criticism of religions and philosophies is dominated entirely by ethical motives. He 
admires certain qualities which he believes (perhaps rightly) to be only possible for an 
aristocratic minority; the majority, in his opinion, should be only means to the excellence of the 
few, and should not be regarded as having any independent claim to happiness or well-being. 

He alludes habitually to ordinary human beings as the "bungled and botched," and sees no 
objection to their suffering if it is necessary for the production of a great man. Thus the whole 
importance of the period from 1789 to 1815 is summed up in Napoleon: "The Revolution made 
Napoleon possible: that is its justification. We ought to desire the anarchical collapse of the 
whole of our civilization if such a reward were to be its result. Napoleon made nationalism 
possible: that is the latter's excuse." Almost all of the higher hopes of this century, he says, are 
due to Napoleon. 

He is fond of expressing himself paradoxically and with a view to shocking conventional 
readers. He does this by employing the words "good" and "evil" with their ordinary 
connotations, and then saying that he prefers "evil" to "good." His book, Beyond Good and Evil, 
really aims at changing the reader's opinion as to what is good and what is evil, but professes, 
except at moments, to be praising what is "evil" and decrying what is "good." He says, for 
instance, that it is a mistake to regard it as a duty to aim at the victory of good and the 
annihilation of evil; this view is English, and typical of "that blockhead, John Stuart Mill," a 
man for whom he has a specially virulent contempt. Of him he says: 

"I abhor the man's vulgarity when he says 'What is right for one man is right for another'; 'Do 
not to others that which you would not that they should do unto you.' jlSuch principles would 
fain establish the whole of human traffic upon mutual services, so that every action would 
appear to be a cash payment for something done to us. The hypothesis here is ignoble to the last 
degree: it is taken for granted 


* I seem to remember that some one anticipated Mill in this dictum. 


- 762 - 


that there is some sort of equivalence in value between my actions and thine." 

True virtue, as opposed to the conventional sort, is not for all, but should remain the 
characteristic of an aristocratic minority. It is not profitable or prudent; it isolates its possessor 
from other men; it is hostile to order, and does harm to inferiors. It is necessary for higher men 
to make war upon the masses, and resist the democratic tendencies of the age, for in all 
directions mediocre people are joining hands to make themselves masters. "Everything that 
pampers, that softens, and that brings the ’people' or 'woman' to the front, operates in favour of 
universal suffrage— that is to say, the dominion of 'inferior' men." The seducer was Rousseau, 
who made woman interesting; then came Harriet Beecher Stowe and the slaves; then the 
Socialists with their championship of workmen and the poor. All these are to be combated. 

Nietzsche's ethic is not one of self-indulgence in any ordinary sense; he believes in Spartan 
discipline and the capacity to endure as well as inflict pain for important ends. He admires 
strength of will above all things. "I test the power of a will," he says, "according to the amount 
of resistance it can offer and the amount of pain and torture it can endure and know how to turn 
to its own advantage; I do not point to the evil and pain of existence with the finger of reproach, 
but rather entertain the hope that life may one day become more evil and more full of suffering 
than it has ever been." He regards compassion as a weakness to be combated. "The object is to 
attain that enormous energy of greatness which can model the man of the future by means of 
discipline and also by means of the annihilation of millions of the bungled and botched, and 
which can yet avoid going to ruin at the sight of the suffering created thereby, the like of which 
has never been seen before." He prophesied with a certain glee an era of great wars; one 
wonders whether he would have been happy if he had lived to see the fulfilment of his 
prophecy. 

He is not, however, a worshipper of the State; far from it. He is a passionate individualist, a 
believer in the hero. The misery of a whole nation, he says, is of less importance than the 
suffering of a great individual: "The misfortunes of all these small folk do not together 
constitute a sum-total, except in the feelings of mighty men." 


* In all quotations from Nietzsche, the italics are in the original. 


- 763 - 


Nietzsche is not a nationalist, and shows no excessive admiration for Gennany. He wants an 
international ruling race, who are to be the lords of the earth: "a new vast aristocracy based upon 
the most severe self-discipline, in which the will of philosophical men of power and artist-tyrants 
will be stamped upon thousands of years." 

He is also not definitely anti-Semitic, though he thinks Germany contains as many Jews as it can 
assimilate, and ought not to permit any further influx of Jews. He dislikes the New Testament, but 
not the Old, of which he speaks in terms of the highest admiration. Injustice to Nietzsche it must 
be emphasized that many modern developments which have a certain connection with his general 
ethical outlook are contrary to his clearly expressed opinions. 

Two applications of his ethic deserve notice: first, his contempt for women; second, his bitter 
critique of Christianity. 

He is never tired of inveighing against women. In his pseudoprophetical book, Thus Spake 
Zarathustra, he says that women are not, as yet, capable of friendship; they are still cats, or birds, 
or at best cows. "Man shall be trained for war and woman for the recreation of the warrior. All 
else is folly." The recreation of the warrior is to be of a peculiar sort if one may trust his most 
emphatic aphorism on this subject: "Thou goest to woman? Do not forget thy whip." 

He is not always quite so fierce, though always equally contemptuous. In the Will to Power he 
says: "We take pleasure in woman as in a perhaps daintier, more delicate, and more ethereal kind 
of creature. What a treat it is to meet creatures who have only dancing and nonsense and finery in 
their minds! They have always been the delight of every tense and profound male soul." However, 
even these graces are only to be found in women so long as they are kept in order by manly men; 
as soon as they achieve any independence they become intolerable. "Woman has so much cause 
for shame; in woman there is so much pedantry, superficiality, schoolmasterliness, petty 
presumption, unbridledness, and indiscretion concealed . . . which has really been best restrained 
and dominated hitherto by the fear of man." So he says in Beyond Good and Evil, where he adds 
that we should think of women as property, as Orientals do. The whole of his abuse of women is 
offered as self-evident truth; it is not backed up by evidence from history or from his own 
experience, which, so far as women were concerned, was almost confined to his sister. 


- 764 - 



Nietzsche's objection to Christianity is that it caused acceptance of what he calls "slave morality." 
It is curious to observe the contrast between his arguments and those of the French philosophes 
who preceded the Revolution. They argued that Christian dogmas are untrue; that Christianity 
teaches submission to what is deemed to be the will of God, whereas self-respecting human 
beings should not bow before any higher Power; and that the Christian Churches have become the 
allies of tyrants, and are helping the enemies of democracy to deny liberty and continue to grind 
the faces of the poor. Nietzsche is not interested in the metaphysical truth of either Christianity or 
any other religion; being convinced that no religion is really true, he judges all religions entirely 
by their social effects. He agrees with the philosophes in objecting to submission to the supposed 
will of God, but he would substitute for it the will of earthly "artist-tyrants." Submission is right, 
except for these supermen, but not submission to the Christian God. As for the Christian 
Churches’ being allies of tyrants and enemies of democracy, that, he says, is the very reverse of the 
truth. The French Revolution and Socialism are, according to him, essentially identical in spirit 
with Christianity; to all alike he is opposed, and for the same reason: that he will not treat all men 
as equal in any respect whatever. 

Buddhism and Christianity, he says, are both "nihilistic" religions, in the sense that they deny any 
ultimate difference of value between one man and another, but Buddhism is much the less 
objectionable of the two. Christianity is degenerative, full of decaying and excremental elements; 
its driving force is the revolt of the bungled and botched. This revolt was begun by the Jews, and 
brought into Christianity by "holy epileptics" like Saint Paul, who had no honesty. "The New 
Testament is the gospel of a completely ignoble species of man." Christianity is the most fatal and 
seductive lie that ever existed. No man of note has ever resembled the Christian ideal; consider for 
instance the heroes of Plutarch's Lives. Christianity is to be condemned for denying the value of 
"pride, pathos of distance, great responsibility, exuberant spirits, splendid animalism, the instincts 
of war and of conquest, the deification of passion, revenge, anger, voluptuousness, adventure, 
knowledge." All these things are good, and all are said by Christianity to be bad— so Nietzsche 
contends. 

Christianity, he argues, aims at taming the heart in man, but this is a mistake. A wild beast has a 
certain splendour, which it loses when 


- 765 - 



it is tamed. The criminals with whom Dostoevsky associated were better than he was, because 
they were more self-respecting. Nietzsche is nauseated by repentance and redemption, which he 
calls a folie circulaire. It is difficult for us to free ourselves from this way of thinking about 
human behaviour: "we are heirs to the consciencevivisection and self-crucifixion of two thousand 
years." There is a very eloquent passage about Pascal, which deserves quotation, because it shows 
Nietzsche's objections to Christianity at their best: 

"What is it that we combat in Christianity? That it aims at destroying the strong, at breaking their 
spirit, at exploiting their moments of weariness and debility, at converting their proud assurance 
into anxiety and conscience-trouble; that it knows how to poison the noblest instincts and to infect 
them with disease, until their strength, their will to power, turns inwards, against themselves— until 
the strong perish through their excessive self-contempt and self-immolation: that gruesome way of 
perishing, of which Pascal is the most famous example." 

In place of the Christian saint Nietzsche wishes to see what he calls the "noble" man, by no means 
as a universal type, but as a governing aristocrat. The "noble" man will be capable of cruelty, and, 
on occasion, of what is vulgarly regarded as crime; he will recognize duties only to equals. He will 
protect artists and poets and all who happen to be masters of some skill, but he will do so as 
himself a member of a higher order than those who only know how to do something. From the 
example of warriors he will learn to associate death with the interests for which he is fighting; to 
sacrifice numbers, and take his cause sufficiently seriously not to spare men; to practise inexorable 
discipline; and to allow himself violence and cunning in war. He will recognize the part played by 
cruelty in aristocratic excellence: "almost everything that we call 'higher culture’ is based upon the 
spiritualizing and intensifying of cruelty." The "noble" man is essentially the incarnate will to 
power. 

What are we to think of Nietzsche's doctrines? How far are they true? Are they in any degree 
useful? Is there in them anything objective, or are they the mere power-phantasies of an invalid? 

It is undeniable that Nietzsche has had a great influence, not among technical philosophers, but 
among people of literary and artistic culture. It must also be conceded that his prophecies as to the 
future 


- 766 - 



have, so far, proved more nearly right than those of liberals or Socialists. If he is a mere symptom 
of disease, the disease must be very wide-spread in the modem world. 

Nevertheless there is a great deal in him that must be dismissed as merely megalomaniac. 
Speaking of Spinoza he says: "How much of personal timidity and vulnerability does this 
masquerade of a sickly recluse betray!" Exactly the same may be said of him, with the less 
reluctance since he has not hesitated to say it of Spinoza. It is obvious that in his day-dreams he is 
a warrior, not a professor; all the men he admires were military. His opinion of women, like every 
man's, is an objectification of his own emotion towards them, which is obviously one of fear. 
"Forget not thy whip"— but nine women out of ten would get the whip away from him, and he 
knew it, so he kept away from women, and soothed his wounded vanity with unkind remarks. 

He condemns Christian love because he thinks it is an outcome of fear: I am afraid my neighbour 
may injure me, and so I assure him that I love him. If I were stronger and bolder, I should openly 
display the contempt for him which of course I feel. It does not occur to Nietzsche as possible that 
a man should genuinely feel universal love, obviously because he himself feels almost universal 
hatred and fear, which he would fain disguise as lordly indifference. His "noble" man —who is 
himself in day-dreams— is a being wholly devoid of sympathy, ruthless, cunning, cruel, concerned 
only with his own power. King Lear, on the verge of madness, says: 

I will do such things-What they are yet I know not— but they shall be The terror of the earth. 

This is Nietzsche's philosophy in a nutshell. 

It never occurred to Nietzsche that the lust for power, with which he endows his superman, is 
itself an outcome of fear. Those who do not fear their neighbours see no necessity to tyrannize 
over them. Men who have conquered fear have not the frantic quality of Nietzsche's "artist-tyrant" 
Neros, who try to enjoy music and massacre while their hearts are filled with dread of the 
inevitable palace revolution. I will not deny that, partly as a result of his teaching, the 


- 767 - 



real world has become very like his nightmare, but that does not make it any the less horrible. 

It must be admitted that there is a certain type of Christian ethic to which Nietzsche's strictures 
can be justly applied. Pascal and Dostoevsky— his own illustrations— have both something abject in 
their virtue. Pascal sacrificed his magnificent mathematical intellect to his God, thereby attributing 
to Him a barbarity which was a cosmic enlargement of Pascal's morbid mental tortures. 
Dostoevsky would have nothing to do with "proper pride"; he would sin in order to repent and to 
enjoy the luxury of confession. I will not argue the question how far such aberrations can justly be 
charged against Christianity, but I will admit that I agree with Nietzsche in thinking Dostoevsky's 
prostration contemptible. A certain uprightness and pride and even self-assertion of a sort, I 
should agree, are elements in the best character; no virtue which has its roots in fear is much to be 
admired. 

There are two sorts of saints: the saint by nature, and the saint from fear. The saint by nature has a 
spontaneous love of mankind; he does good because to do so gives him happiness. The saint from 
fear, on the other hand, like the man who only abstains from theft because of the police, would be 
wicked if he were not restrained by the thought of hell-fire or of his neighbours' vengeance. 
Nietzsche can only imagine the second sort of saint; he is so full of fear and hatred that 
spontaneous love of mankind seems to him impossible. He has never conceived of the man who, 
with all the fearlessness and stubborn pride of the supennan, nevertheless does not inflict pain 
because he has no wish to do so. Does any one suppose that Lincoln acted as he did from fear of 
hell? Yet to Nietzsche Lincoln is abject, Napoleon magnificent. 

It remains to consider the main ethical problem raised by Nietzsche, namely: should our ethic be 
aristocratic, or should it, in some sense, treat all men alike? This is a question which, as I have just 
stated it, has no very clear meaning, and obviously, the first step is to try to make the issue more 
definite. 

We must in the first place try to distinguish an aristocratic ethic from an aristocratic political 
theory. A believer in Bentham’s principle of the greatest happiness of the greatest number has a 
democratic ethic, but he may think that the general happiness is best promoted by an aristocratic 
form of government. This is not Nietzsche's posi- 


- 768 - 



tion. He holds that the happiness of common people is no part of the good per se. All that is good 
or bad in itself exists only in the superior few; what happens to the rest is of no account. 

The next question is: How are the superior few defined? In practice, they have usually been a 
conquering race or a hereditary aristocracy —and aristocracies have usually been, at least in theory, 
descendants of conquering races. I think Nietzsche would accept this definition. "No morality is 
possible without good birth," he tells us. He says that the noble caste is always at first barbarian, 
but that every elevation of Man is due to aristocratic society. 

It is not clear whether Nietzsche regards the superiority of the aristocrat as congenital or as due to 
education and environment. If the latter, it is difficult to defend the exclusion of others from 
advantages for which, ex hypothesi, they are equally qualified. I shall therefore assume that he 
regards conquering aristocracies and their descendants as biologically superior to their subjects, as 
men are superior to domestic animals, though in a lesser degree. 

What shall we mean by "biologically superior"? We shall mean when interpreting Nietzsche, that 
individuals of the superior race and their descendants are more likely to be "noble" in Nietzsche's 
sense: they will have more strength of will, more courage, more impulse towards power, less 
sympathy, less fear, and less gentleness. 

We can now state Nietzsche’s ethic. I think what follows is a fair analysis of it: 

Victors in war, and their descendants, are usually biologically superior to the vanquished. It is 
therefore desirable that they should hold all the power, and should manage affairs exclusively in 
their own interests. 

There is here still the word "desirable" to be considered. What is "desirable" in Nietzsche's 
philosophy? From the outsider's point of view, what Nietzsche calls "desirable" is what Nietzsche 
desires. With this interpretation, Nietzsche’s doctrine might be stated more simply and honestly in 
the one sentence: "I wish I had lived in the Athens of Pericles or the Florence of the Medici." But 
this is not a philosophy; it is a biographical fact about a certain individual. The word "desirable" is 
not synonymous with "desired by me"; it has some claim, however shadowy, to legislative 
universality. A theist may say that what is desirable is what God desires, but Nietzsche cannot say 
this. 


- 769 - 



He could say that he knows what is good by an ethical intuition, but he will not say this, because it 
sounds too Kantian. What he can say, as an expansion of the word "desirable," is this: "If men will 
read my works, a certain percentage of them will come to share my desires as regards the 
organization of society; these men, inspired by the energy and determination which my philosophy 
will give them, can preserve and restore aristocracy, with themselves as aristocrats or (like me) 
sycophants of aristocracy. In this way they will achieve a fuller life than they can have as servants 
of the people." 

There is another element in Nietzsche, which is closely akin to the objection urged by "rugged 
individualists" against trade-unions. In a fight of all against all, the victor is likely to possess 
certain qualities which Nietzsche admires, such as courage, resourcefulness, and strength of will. 
But if the men who do not possess these aristocratic qualities (who are the vast majority) band 
themselves together, they may win in spite of their individual inferiority. In this fight of the 
collective canaille against the aristocrats, Christianity is the ideological front, as the French 
Revolution was the fighting front. We ought therefore to oppose every kind of union among the 
individually feeble, for fear lest their combined power should outweigh that of the individually 
strong; on the other hand, we ought to promote union among the tough and virile elements of the 
population. The first step towards the creation of such a union is the preaching of Nietzsche's 
philosophy. It will be seen that it is not easy to preserve the distinction between ethics and 
politics. 

Suppose we wish— as I certainly do— to find arguments against Nietzsche's ethics and politics, what 
arguments can we find? 

There are weighty practical arguments, showing that the attempt to secure his ends will in fact 
secure something quite different. Aristocracies of birth are nowadays discredited; the only 
practicable form of aristocracy is an organization like the Fascist or the Nazi party. Such an 
organization rouses opposition, and is likely to be defeated in war; but if it is not defeated it must, 
before long, become nothing but a police State, where the rulers live in terror of assassination, and 
the heroes are in concentration camps. In such a community faith and honour are sapped by 
delation, and the would-be aristocracy of supennen degenerates into a clique of trembling 
poltroons. 

These, however, are arguments for our time; they would not have 


- 770 - 



held good in past ages, when aristocracy was unquestioned. The Egyptian government was 
conducted on Nietzschean principles for several millennia. The governments of almost all large 
States were aristocratic until the American and the French Revolutions. We have therefore to ask 
ourselves whether there is any good reason for preferring democracy to a form of government 
which has had such a long and successful history-or rather, since we are concerned with 
philosophy, not politics, whether there are objective grounds for rejecting the ethic by which 
Nietzsche supports aristocracy. 

The ethical, as opposed to the political, question is one as to sympathy. Sympathy, in the sense of 
being made unhappy by the sufferings of others, is to some extent natural to human beings; young 
children are troubled when they hear other children crying. But the development of this feeling is 
very different in different people. Some find pleasure in the infliction of torture; others, like 
Buddha, feel that they cannot be completely happy so long as any living thing is suffering. Most 
people divide mankind emotionally into friends and enemies, feeling sympathy for the former, but 
not for the latter. An ethic such as that of Christianity or Buddhism has its emotional basis in 
universal sympathy; Nietzsche's, in a complete absence of sympathy. (He frequently preaches 
against sympathy, and in this respect one feels that he has no difficulty in obeying his own 
precepts.) The question is: If Buddha and Nietzsche were confronted, could either produce any 
argument that ought to appeal to the impartial listener? I am not thinking of political arguments. 
We can imagine them appearing before the Almighty, as in the first chapter of the Book of Job, 
and offering advice as to the sort of world He should create. What could either say? 

Buddha would open the argument by speaking of the lepers, outcast and miserable; the poor, 
toiling with aching limbs and barely kept alive by scanty nourishment; the wounded in battle, 
dying in slow agony; the orphans, ill-treated by cruel guardians; and even the most successful 
haunted by the thought of failure and death. From all this load of sorrow, he would say, a way of 
salvation must be found, and salvation can only come through love. 

Nietzsche, whom only Omnipotence could restrain from interrupting, would burst out when his 
turn came: "Good heavens, man, you must learn to be of tougher fibre. Why go about snivelling 
because 


- 771 - 



trivial people suffer? Or, for that matter, because great men suffer? Trivial people suffer trivially, 
great men suffer greatly, and great sufferings are not to be regretted, because they are noble. Your 
ideal is a purely negative one, absence of suffering, which can be completely secured by non- 
existence. I, on the other hand, have positive ideals: I admire Alcibiades, and the Emperor 
Frederick II, and Napoleon. For the sake of such men, any misery is worth while. I appeal to You, 
Lord, as the greatest of creative artists, do not let Your artistic impulses be curbed by the 
degenerate fear-ridden maunderings of this wretched psychopath." 

Buddha, who in the courts of Heaven has learnt all history since his death, and has mastered 
science with delight in the knowledge and sorrow at the use to which men have put it, replies with 
calm urbanity: "You are mistaken, Professor Nietzsche, in thinking my ideal a purely negative 
one. True, it includes a negative element, the absence of suffering; but it has in addition quite as 
much that is positive as is to be found in your doctrine. Though I have no special admiration for 
Alcibiades and Napoleon, I, too, have my heroes: my successor Jesus, because he told men to love 
their enemies; the men who discovered how to master the forces of nature and secure food with 
less labour; the medical men who have shown how to diminish disease; the poets and artists and 
musicians who have caught glimpses of the Divine beatitude. Love and knowledge and delight in 
beauty are not negations; they are enough to fill the lives of the greatest men that have ever lived." 

"All the same," Nietzsche replies, "your world would be insipid. You should study Heraclitus, 
whose works survive complete in the celestial library. Your love is compassion, which is elicited 
by pain; your truth, if you are honest, is unpleasant, and only to be known through suffering; and 
as to beauty, what is more beautiful than the tiger, who owes his splendour to his fierceness? No, 
if the Lord should decide for your world, I fear we should all die of boredom." 

" You might," Buddha replies, "because you love pain, and your love of life is a sham. But those 
who really love life would be happy as no one can be happy in the world as it is." 

For my part, I agree with Buddha as I have imagined him. But I do not know how to prove that he 
is right by any argument such as can be used in a mathematical or a scientific question. I dislike 


- 772 - 



Nietzsche because he likes the contemplation of pain, because he erects conceit into a duty, 
because the men whom he most admires are conquerors, whose glory is cleverness in causing 
men to die. But I think the ultimate argument against his philosophy, as against any unpleasant 
but internally self-consistent ethic, lies not in an appeal to facts, but in an appeal to the 
emotions. Nietzsche despises universal love; I feel it the motive power to all that I desire as 
regards the world. His followers have had their innings, but we may hope that it is coming 
rapidly to an end. 


CHAPTER XXVI The Utilitarians ^ 

THROUGHOUT the period from Kant to Nietzsche, professional philosophers in Great Britain 
remained almost completely unaffected by their German contemporaries, with the sole 
exception of Sir William Hamilton, who had little influence. Coleridge and Carlyle, it is true, 
were profoundly affected by Kant, Fichte, and the German Romantics, but they were not 
philosophers in the technical sense. Somebody seems to have once mentioned Kant to James 
Mill, who, after a cursory inspection, remarked: "I see well enough what poor Kant would be 
at." But this degree of recognition is exceptional; in general, there is complete silence about the 
Germans. Bentham and his school derived their philosophy, in all its main outlines, from 
Locke, Hartley, and HelvA©tius; their importance is not so much philosophical as political, as 
the leaders of British radicalism, and as the men who unintentionally prepared the way for the 
doctrines of socialism. 

Jeremy Bentham, who was the recognized head of the "Philosophical Radicals," was not the 
sort of man one expects to find at the head 


For a fuller treatment of this subject, as also of Marx, see Part II of my Freedom and 
Organization, 1814-1914. 


- 773 - 


of a movement of this sort. He was born in 1748, but did not become a Radical till 1808. He was 
painfully shy, and could not without great trepidation endure the company of strangers. He wrote 
voluminously, but never bothered to publish; what was published under his name had been 
benevolently purloined by his friends. His main interest was jurisprudence, in which he 
recognized HelvA©tius and Beccaria as his most important predecessors. It was through the 
theory of law that he became interested in ethics and politics. 

He bases his whole philosophy on two principles, the "association principle," and the "greatest- 
happiness principle." The association principle had been emphasised by Hartley in 1749; before 
him, though association of ideas was recognized as occurring, it was regarded, for instance by 
Locke, only as a source of trivial errors. Bentham, following Hartley, made it the basic principle 
of psychology. He recognizes association of ideas and language, and also association of ideas and 
ideas. By means of this principle he aims at a detenninistic account of mental occurrences. In 
essence the doctrine is the same as the more modem theory of the "conditioned reflex," based on 
Pavlov's experiments. The only important difference is that Pavlov's conditioned reflex is 
physiological, whereas the association of ideas was purely mental. Pavlov's work is therefore 
capable of a materialistic explanation, such as is given to it by the behaviourists, whereas the 
association of ideas led rather towards a psychology more or less independent of physiology. 

There can be no doubt that, scientifically, the principle of the conditioned reflex is an advance on 
the older principle. Pavlov's principle is this: Given a reflex according to which a stimulus B 
produces a reaction C, and given that a certain animal has frequently experienced a stimulus A at 
the same time as B, it often happens that in time the stimulus A will produce the reaction C even 
when B is absent. To determine the circumstances under which this happens is a matter of 
experiment. Clearly, if we substitute ideas for A, B, and C, Pavlov's principle becomes that of the 
association of ideas. 

Both principles, indubitably, are valid over a certain field; the only controversial question is as to 
the extent of this field. Bentham and his followers exaggerated the extent of the field in the case of 
Hartley's principle, as certain behaviourists have in the case of Pavlov's principle. 

To Bentham, detenninism in psychology was important, because 


- 774 - 



he wished to establish a code of laws— and, more generally, a social system— which would 
automatically make men virtuous. His second principle, that of the greatest happiness, became 
necessary at this point in order to define "virtue." 

Bentham maintained that what is good is pleasure or happinesshe used these words as synonyms— 
and what is bad is pain. Therefore one state of affairs is better than another if it involves a greater 
balance of pleasure over pain, or a smaller balance of pain over pleasure. Of all possible states of 
affairs, that one is best which involves the greatest balance of pleasure over pain. 

There is nothing new in this doctrine, which came to be called "utilitarianism." It had been 
advocated by Hutcheson as early as 1725. Bentham attributes it to Priestley, who, however, had no 
special claim to it. It is virtually contained in Locke. Bentham’s merit consisted not in the doctrine, 
but in his vigorous application of it to various practical problems. 

Bentham held not only that the good is happiness in general, but also that each individual always 
pursues what he believes to be his own happiness. The business of the legislator, therefore, is to 
produce hannony between public and private interests. It is to the interest of the public that I 
should abstain from theft, but it is only to my interest where there is an effective criminal law. 
Thus the criminal law is a method of making the interests of the individual coincide with those of 
the community; that is its justification. 

Men are to be punished by the criminal law in order to prevent crime, not because we hate the 
criminal. It is more important that the punishment should be certain than that it should be severe. 
In his day, in England, many quite minor offences were subject to the death penalty, with the 
result that juries often refused to convict because they thought the penalty excessive. Bentham 
advocated abolition of the death penalty for all but the worst offences, and before he died the 
criminal law had been mitigated in this respect. 

Civil law, he says, should have four aims: subsistence, abundance, security, and equality. It will be 
observed that he does not mention liberty. In fact, he cared little for liberty. He admired the 
benevolent autocrats who preceded the French Revolution— Catherine the Great and the Emperor 
Francis. He had a great contempt for the doctrine of the rights of man. The rights of man, he said, 
are plain nonsense; 


- 775 - 



the imprescriptible rights of man, nonsense on stilts. When the French revolutionaries made their 
"DAOcIaration des droits de I'homme, " Bentham called it "a metaphysical work— the ne plus ultra 
of metaphysics." Its articles, he said, could be divided into three classes: (1) Those that are 
unintelligible, (2) Those that are false, (3) Those that are both. 

Bentham's ideal, like that of Epicurus, was security, not liberty. "Wars and storms are best to read 
of, but peace and calms are better to endure." 

His gradual evolution towards Radicalism had two sources: on the one hand, a belief in equality, 
deduced from the calculus of pleasures and pains; on the other hand, an inflexible detennination 
to submit everything to the arbitrament of reason as he understood it. His love of equality early led 
him to advocate equal division of a man's property among his children, and to oppose 
testamentary freedom. In later years it led him to oppose monarchy and hereditary aristocracy, and 
to advocate complete democracy, including votes for women. His refusal to believe without 
rational grounds led him to reject religion, including belief in God; it made him keenly critical of 
absurdities and anomalies in the law, however venerable their historical origin. He would not 
excuse anything on the ground that it was traditional. From early youth he was opposed to 
imperialism, whether that of the British in America, or that of other nations; he considered 
colonies a folly. 

It was through the influence of James Mill that Bentham was induced to take sides in practical 
politics. James Mill was twenty-five years younger than Bentham, and an ardent disciple of his 
doctrines, but he was also an active Radical. Bentham gave Mill a house (which had belonged to 
Milton), and assisted him financially while he wrote a history of India. When this history was 
finished, the East India Company gave James Mill a post, as they did afterwards to his son until 
their abolition as a sequel to the Mutiny. James Mill greatly admired Condorcet and HelvA©tius. 
Like all Radicals of that period, he believed in the omnipotence of education. He practised his 
theories on his son John Stuart Mill, with results partly good, partly bad. The most important bad 
result was that John Stuart could never quite shake off his influence, even when he perceived that 
his father's outlook had been narrow. 

James Mill, like Bentham, considered pleasure the only good and 


- 776 - 



pain the only evil. But like Epicurus he valued moderate pleasure most. He thought intellectual 
enjoyments the best and temperance the chief virtue. " The intense was with him a bye-word of 
scornful disapprobation," says his son, who adds that he objected to the modern stress laid upon 
feeling. Like the whole utilitarian school, he was utterly opposed to every fonn of romanticism. 

He thought politics could be governed by reason, and expected men's opinions to be detennined 
by the weight of evidence. If opposing sides in a controversy are presented with equal skill, there 
is a moral certaintyso he held— that the greater number will judge right. His outlook was limited by 
the poverty of his emotional nature, but within his limitations he had the merits of industry, 
disinterestedness, and rationality. 

His son John Stuart Mill, who was born in 1808, carried on a somewhat softened form of the 
Benthamite doctrine to the time of his death in 1873. 

Throughout the middle portion of the nineteenth century, the influence of the Benthamites on 
British legislation and policy was astonishingly great, considering their complete absence of 
emotional appeal. 

Bentham advanced various arguments in favour of the view that the general happiness is the 
summum bonum. Some of these arguments were acute criticisms of other ethical theories. In his 
treatise on political sophisms he says, in language which seems to anticipate Marx, that 
sentimental and ascetic moralities serve the interests of the governing class, and are the product of 
an aristocratic rA©gime. Those who teach the morality of sacrifice, he continues, are not victims 
of error: they want others to sacrifice to them. The moral order, he says, results from equilibrium 
of interests. Governing corporations pretend that there is already identity of interests between the 
governors and the governed, but refonners make it clear that this identity does not yet exist, and 
try to bring it about. He maintains that only the principle of utility can give a criterion in morals 
and legislation, and lay the foundation of a social science. His main positive argument in favour of 
his principle is that it is really implied by apparently different ethical systems. This, however, is 
only made plausible by a severe restriction of his survey. 

There is an obvious lacuna in Bentham's system. If every man always pursues his own pleasure, 
how are we to secure that the legis- 


- 777 - 



lator shall pursue the pleasure of mankind in general? Bentham's own instinctive benevolence 
(which his psychological theories prevented him from noticing) concealed the problem from him. 
If he had been employed to draw up a code of laws for some country, he would have framed his 
proposals in what he conceived to be the public interest, not so as to further his own interests or 
(consciously) the interests of his class. But if he had recognized this fact, he would have had to 
modify his psychological doctrines. He seems to have thought that, by means of democracy 
combined with adequate supervision, legislators could be so controlled that they could only 
further their private interests by being useful to the general public. There was in his day not much 
material for forming a judgement as to the working of democratic institutions, and his optimism 
was therefore perhaps excusable, but in our more disillusioned age it seems somewhat naA ve. 

John Stuart Mill, in his Utilitarianism, offers an argument which is so fallacious that it is hard to 
understand how he can have thought it valid. He says: Pleasure is the only thing desired; therefore 
pleasure is the only thing desirable. He argues that the only things visible are things seen, the only 
things audible are things heard, and similarly the only things desirable are things desired. He does 
not notice that a thing is "visible" if it can be seen, but "desirable" if it ought to be desired. Thus 
"desirable" is a word presupposing an ethical theory; we cannot infer what is desirable from what 
is desired. 

Again: if each man in fact and inevitably pursues his own pleasure, there is no point in saying he 
ought to do something else. Kant urged that "you ought’ implies "you can"; conversely, if you 
cannot, it is futile to say you ought, // each man must always pursue his own Pleasure, ethics is 
reduced to prudence: you may do well to further the interests of others in the hope that they in turn 
will further yours. Similarly in politics all co-operation is a matter of log-rolling. From the 
premisses of the utilitarians no other conclusion is validly deducible. 

There are two distinct questions involved. First, does each man pursue his own happiness? 

Second, is the general happiness the right end of human action? 

When it is said that each man desires his own happiness, the statement is capable of two 
meanings, of which one is a truism and the other is false. Whatever I may happen to desire, I shall 
get some 


- 778 - 



pleasure from achieving my wish; in this sense, whatever I desire is a pleasure, and it may be said, 
though somewhat loosely, that pleasures are what I desire. This is the sense of the doctrine which 
is a truism. 

But if what is meant is that, when I desire anything, I desire it because of the pleasure that it will 
give me, that is usually untrue. When I am hungry I desire food, and so long as my hunger persists 
food will give me pleasure. But the hunger, which is a desire, comes first; the pleasure is a 
consequence of the desire. I do not deny that there are occasions when there is a direct desire for 
pleasure. If you have decided to devote a free evening to the theatre, you will choose the theatre 
that you think will give you the most pleasure. But the actions thus determined by the direct desire 
for pleasure are exceptional and unimportant. Everybody's main activities are detennined by 
desires which are anterior to the calculation of pleasures and pains. 

Anything whatever may be an object of desire; a masochist may desire his own pain. The 
masochist, no doubt, derives pleasure from the pain that he has desired, but the pleasure is because 
of the desire, not vice versa. A man may desire something that does not affect him personally 
except because of his desire-for instance, the victory of one side in a war in which his country is 
neutral. He may desire an increase of general happiness, or a mitigation of general suffering. Or he 
may, like Carlyle, desire the exact opposite. As his desires vary, so do his pleasures. 

Ethics is necessary because men's desires conflict. The primary cause of conflict is egoism: most 
people are more interested in their own welfare than in that of other people. But conflicts are 
equally possible where there is no element of egoism. One man may wish everybody to be 
Catholic, another may wish everybody to be Calvinist. Such non-egoistic desires are frequently 
involved in social conflicts. Ethics has a twofold purpose: First, to find a criterion by which to 
distinguish good and bad desires; second, by means of praise and blame, to promote good desires 
and discourage such as are bad. 

The ethical part of the utilitarian doctrine, which is logically independent of the psychological 
part, says: Those desires and those actions are good which in fact promote the general happiness. 
This need not be the intention of an action, but only its effect. Is there any valid theoretical 
argument either for or against this doctrine? We found ourselves faced with a similar question in 
relation to Nietzsche. 


- 779 - 



His ethic differs from that of the utilitarians, since it holds that only a minority of the human race 
have ethical importance— the happiness or unhappiness of the remainder should be ignored. I do 
not myself believe that this disagreement can be dealt with by theoretical arguments such as might 
be used in a scientific question. Obviously those who are excluded from the Nietzschean 
aristocracy will object, and thus the issue becomes political rather than theoretical. The utilitarian 
ethic is democratic and anti-romantic. Democrats are likely to accept it, but those who like a more 
Byronic view of the world can, in my opinion, be refuted only practically, not by considerations 
which appeal only to facts as opposed to desires. 

The Philosophical Radicals were a transitional school. Their system gave birth to two others, of 
more importance than itself, namely Darwinism and Socialism. Darwinism was an application to 
the whole of animal and vegetable life of Malthus's theory of population, which was an integral 
part of the politics and economics of the Benthamites -a global free competition, in which victory 
went to the animals that most resembled successful capitalists. Darwin himself was influenced by 
Malthus, and was in general sympathy with the Philosophical Radicals. There was, however, a 
great difference between the competition admired by orthodox economists and the struggle for 
existence which Darwin proclaimed as the motive force of evolution. "Free competition," in 
orthodox economics, is a very artificial conception, hedged in by legal restrictions. You may 
undersell a competitor, but you must not murder him. You must not use the anned forces of the 
State to help you to get the better of foreign manufacturers. Those who have not the good fortune 
to possess capital must not seek to improve their lot by revolution. "Free competition," as 
understood by the Benthamites, was by no means really free. 

Darwinian competition was not of this limited sort; there were no rules against hitting below the 
belt. The framework of law does not exist among animals, nor is war excluded as a competitive 
method. The use of the State to secure victory in competition was against the rules as conceived 
by the Benthamites, but could not be excluded from the Darwinian struggle. In fact, though 
Darwin himself was a Liberal, and though Nietzsche never mentions him except with contempt, 
Darwin "Survival of the Fittest" led, when thoroughly 


- 780 - 



assimilated, to something much more like Nietzsche's philosophy than like Bentham's. These 
developments, however, belong to a later period, since Darwin Origin of Species was published in 
1859, and its political implications were not at first perceived. 

Socialism, on the contrary, began in the heyday of Benthamism, and as a direct outcome of 
orthodox economics. Ricardo, who was intimately associated with Bentham, Malthus, and James 
Mill, taught that the exchange value of a commodity is entirely due to the labour expended in 
producing it. He published this theory in 1817, and eight years later Thomas Hodgskin, an ex- 
naval officer, published the first Socialist rejoinder, Labour Defended Against the Claims of 
Capital. He argued that if, as Ricardo taught, all value is conferred by labour, then all the reward 
ought to go to labour; the share at present obtained by the landowner and the capitalist must be 
mere extortion. Meanwhile Robert Owen, after much practical experience as a manufacturer, had 
become convinced of the doctrine which soon came to be called Socialism. (The first use of the 
word "Socialist" occurs in 1827, when it is applied to the followers of Owen.) Machinery, he said, 
was displacing labour, and laisser faire gave the working classes no adequate means of combating 
mechanical power. The method which he proposed for dealing with the evil was the earliest form 
of modern Socialism. 

Although Owen was a friend of Bentham, who had invested a considerable sum of money in 
Owen's business, the Philosophical Radicals did not like his new doctrines; in fact, the advent of 
Socialism made them less Radical and less philosophical than they had been. Hodgskin secured a 
certain following in London, and James Mill was horrified. He wrote: 

"Their notions of property look ugly; . . . they seem to think that it should not exist, and that the 
existence of it is an evil to them. Rascals, I have no doubt, are at work among them. . . . The fools, 
not to see that what they madly desire would be such a calamity to them as no hands but their own 
could bring upon them." 

This letter, written in 1831, may be taken as the beginning of the long war between Capitalism 
and Socialism. In a later letter, James Mill attributes the doctrine to the "mad nonsense" of 
Hodgskin, and adds: "These opinions, if they were to spread, would be the subversion 


- 781 - 



of civilized society; worse than the overwhelming deluge of Huns and Tartars." 

Socialism, in so far as it is only political or economic, does not come within the purview of a 
history of philosophy. But in the hands of Karl Marx Socialism acquired a philosophy. His 
philosophy will be considered in the next chapter. 

CHAPTER XXVII Karl Marx 

MARX is usually thought of as the man who claimed to have made Socialism scientific, and who 
did more than any one else to create the powerful movement which, by attraction and repulsion, 
has dominated the recent history of Europe. It does not come within the scope of the present work 
to consider his economics, or his politics except in certain general aspects; it is only as a 
philosopher, and an influence on the philosophy of others, that I propose to deal with him. In this 
respect he is difficult to classify. In one aspect, he is an outcome, like Hodgskin, of the 
Philosophical Radicals, continuing their rationalism and their opposition to the romantics. In 
another aspect he is a revivifier of materialism, giving it a new interpretation and a new 
connection with human history. In yet another aspect he is the last of the great system-builders, the 
successor of Hegel, a believer, like him, in a rational formula summing up the evolution of 
mankind. Emphasis upon any one of these aspects at the expense of the others gives a false and 
distorted view of his philosophy. 

The events of his life in part account for this complexity. He was bom in 1818, at TrA'ves, like 
Saint Ambrose. TrA'ves had been profoundly influenced by the French during the revolutionary 
and Napoleonic era, and was much more cosmopolitan in outlook than most parts of Germany. 

His ancestors had been rabbis, but his parents became Christian when he was a child. He married 
a gentile aristocrat, 


- 782 - 



to whom he remained devoted throughout his life. At the university he was influenced by the still 
prevalent Hegelianism, as also by Feuerbach's revolt against Hegel towards materialism. He tried 
journalism, but the Rheinische Zeitung, which he edited, was suppressed by the authorities for its 
radicalism. After this, in 1843, he went to France to study Socialism. There he met Engels, who 
was the manager of a factory in Manchester. Through him he came to know English labour 
conditions and English economics. He thus acquired, before the revolutions of 1848, an unusually 
international culture. So far as Western Europe was concerned, he showed no national bias. This 
cannot be said of Eastern Europe, for he always despised the Slavs. 

He took part in both the French and the German revolutions of 1848, but the reaction compelled 
him to seek refuge in England in 1849. He spent the rest of his life, with a few brief intervals, in 
London, troubled by poverty, illness, and the deaths of children, but nevertheless indefatigably 
writing and amassing knowledge. The stimulus to his work was always the hope of the social 
revolution, if not in his lifetime, then in some not very distant future. 

Marx, like Bentham and James Mill, will have nothing to do with romanticism; it is always his 
intention to be scientific. His economics is an outcome of British classical economics, changing 
only the motive force. Classical economists, consciously or unconsciously, aimed at the welfare of 
the capitalist, as opposed both to the landowner and to the wage-earner; Marx, on the contrary, set 
to work to represent the interest of the wage-earner. He had in youth— as appears in the 
Communist Manifesto of 1848— the fire and passion appropriate to a new revolutionary 
movement, as liberalism had had in the time of Milton. But he was always anxious to appeal to 
evidence, and never relied upon any extra-scientific intuition. 

He called himself a materialist, but not of the eighteenth-century sort. His sort, which, under 
Hegelian influence, he called "dialectical," differed in an important way from traditional 
materialism, and was more akin to what is now called instrumentalism. The older materialism, he 
said, mistakenly regarded sensation as passive, and thus attributed activity primarily to the object. 
In Marx's view, all sensation or perception is an interaction between subject and object; the bare 
object, apart from the activity of the percipient, is a mere raw material, which is transformed in the 
process of becoming known. 


- 783 - 



Knowledge in the old sense of passive contemplation is an unreal abstraction; the process that 
really takes place is one of handling things. "The question whether objective truth belongs to 
human thinking is not a question of theory, but a practical question," he says. "The truth, i.e., 
the reality and power, of thought must be demonstrated in practice. The contest as to the reality 
or non-reality of a thought which is isolated from practice, is a purely scholastic question. . . . 
Philosophers have only interpreted the world in various ways, but the real task is to alter it." 

I think we may interpret Marx as meaning that the process which philosophers have called the 
pursuit of knowledge is not, as has been thought, one in which the object is constant while all 
the adaptation is on the part of the knower. On the contrary, both subject and object, both the 
knower and the thing known, are in a continual process of mutual adaptation. He calls the 
process "dialectical" because it is never fully completed. 

It is essential to this theory to deny the reality of "sensation" as conceived by British empiricists. 
What happens, when it is most nearly what they mean by "sensation," would be better called 
"noticing," which implies activity. In fact— so Marx would contend— we only notice things as 
part of the process of acting with reference to them, and any theory which leaves out action is a 
misleading abstraction. 

So far as I know, Marx was the first philosopher who criticized the notion of "truth" from this 
activist point of view. In him this criticism was not much emphasized, and I shall therefore say 
no more about it here, leaving the examination of the theory to a later chapter. 

Marx's philosophy of history is a blend of Hegel and British economics. Like Hegel, he thinks 
that the world develops according to a dialectical formula, but he totally disagrees with Hegel as 
to the motive force of this development. Hegel believed in a mystical entity called "Spirit," 
which causes human history to develop according to the stages of the dialectic as set forth in 
Hegel's Logic. Why Spirit has to go through these stages is not clear. One is tempted to suppose 
that Spirit is trying to understand Hegel, and at each stage rashly objectifies what it has been 
reading. Marx's dialectic has none of this quality except a certain inevitableness. For Marx, 
matter, not spirit, 


* Eleven Theses on Feuerbach, 1845. 


- 784 - 


is the driving force. But it is matter in the peculiar sense that we have been considering, not the 
wholly dehumanized matter of the atomists. This means that, for Marx, the driving force is really 
man's relation to matter, of which the most important part is his mode of production. In this way 
Marx's materialism, in practice, becomes economics. 

The politics, religion, philosophy, and art of any epoch in human history are, according to Marx, 
an outcome of its methods of production, and, to a lesser extent, of distribution. I think he would 
not maintain that this applies to all the niceties of culture, but only to its broad outlines. The 
doctrine is called the "materialist conception of history." This is a very important thesis; in 
particular, it concerns the historian of philosophy. I do not myself accept the thesis as it stands, but 
I think that it contains very important elements of truth, and I am aware that it has influenced my 
own views of philosophical development as set forth in the present work. Let us, to begin with, 
consider the history of philosophy in relation to Marx's doctrine. 

Subjectively, every philosopher appears to himself to be engaged in the pursuit of something 
which may be called "truth." Philosophers may differ as to the definition of "truth," but at any rate 
it is something objective, something which, in some sense, everybody ought to accept. No man 
would engage in the pursuit of philosophy if he thought that all philosophy is merely an 
expression of irrational bias. But every philosopher will agree that many other philosophers have 
been actuated by bias, and have had extra-rational reasons, of which they were usually 
unconscious, for many of their opinions. Marx, like the rest, believes in the truth of his own 
doctrines; he does not regard them as nothing but an expression of the feelings natural to a 
rebellious middle-class German Jew in the middle of the nineteenth century. What can be said 
about this conflict between the subjective and objective views of a philosophy? 

We may say, in a broad way, that Greek philosophy down to Aristotle expresses the mentality 
appropriate to the City State; that Stoicism is appropriate to a cosmopolitan despotism; that 
scholastic philosophy is an intellectual expression of the Church as an organization; that 
philosophy since Descartes, or at any rate since Locke, tends to embody the prejudices of the 
commercial middle class; and that Marxism and Fascism are philosophies appropriate to the 
modem in- 


- 785 - 



dustrial State. This, I think, is both true and important. I think, however, that Marx is wrong in 
two respects. First, the social circumstances of which account must be taken are quite as much 
political as economic; they have to do with power, of which wealth is only one form. Second, 
social causation largely ceases to apply as soon as a problem becomes detailed and technical. The 
first of these objections I have set forth in my book Power, and I shall therefore say no more about 
it. The second more intimately concerns the history of philosophy, and I will give some examples 
of its scope. 

Take, first, the problem of universals. This problem was first discussed by Plato, then by Aristotle, 
by the Schoolmen, by the British empiricists, and by the most modem logicians. It would be 
absurd to deny that bias has influenced the opinions of philosophers on this question. Plato was 
influenced by Pannenides and Orphism; he wanted an eternal world, and could not believe in the 
ultimate reality of the temporal flux. Aristotle was more empirical, and had no dislike of the 
every-day world. Thorough-going empiricists in modern times have a bias which is the opposite of 
Plato's: they find the thought of a super-sensible world unpleasant, and are willing to go to great 
lengths to avoid having to believe in it. But these opposing kinds of bias are perennial, and have 
only a somewhat remote connection with the social system. It is said that love of the eternal is 
characteristic of a leisure class, which lives on the labour of others. I doubt if this is true. Epictetus 
and Spinoza were not gentlemen of leisure. It might be urged, on the contrary, that the conception 
of heaven as a place where nothing is done is that of weary toilers who want nothing but rest. 

Such argumentation can be carried on indefinitely, and leads nowhere. 

On the other hand, when we come to the detail of the controversy about universals, we find that 
each side can invent arguments which the other side will admit to be valid. Some of Aristotle's 
criticisms of Plato on this question have been almost universally accepted. In quite recent times, 
although no decision has been reached, a new technique has been developed, and many incidental 
problems have been solved. It is not irrational to hope that, before very long, a definitive 
agreement may be reached by logicians on this question. 

Take, as a second example, the ontological argument. This, as we have seen, was invented by 
Anselm, rejected by Thomas Aquinas, 


- 786 - 



accepted by Descartes, refuted by Kant, and reinstated by Hegel. I think it may be said quite 
decisively that, as a result of analysis of the concept "existence," modern logic has proved this 
argument invalid. This is not a matter of temperament or of the social system; it is a purely 
technical matter. The refutation of the argument affords, of course, no ground for supposing its 
conclusion, namely the existence of God, to be untrue; if it did, we cannot suppose that Thomas 
Aquinas would have rejected the argument. 

Or take the question of materialism. This is a word which is capable of many meanings; we have 
seen that Marx radically altered its significance. The heated controversies as to its truth or 
falsehood have largely depended, for their continued vitality, upon avoidance of definition. When 
the term is defined, it will be found that, according to some possible definitions, materialism is 
demonstrably false; according to certain others, it may be true, though there is no positive reason 
to think so; while according to yet other definitions there are some reasons in its favour, though 
these reasons are not conclusive. All this, again, depends upon technical considerations, and has 
nothing to do with the social system. 

The truth of the matter is really fairly simple. What is conventionally called "philosophy" consists 
of two very different elements. On the one hand, there are questions which are scientific or 
logical; these are amenable to methods as to which there is general agreement. On the other hand, 
there are questions of passionate interest to large numbers of people, as to which there is no solid 
evidence either way. Among the latter are practical questions, as to which it is impossible to 
remain aloof. When there is a war, I must support my own country or come into painful conflict 
both with friends and with the authorities. At many times there has been no middle course 
between supporting and opposing the official religion. For one reason or another, we all find it 
impossible to maintain an attitude of sceptical detachment on many issues as to which pure reason 
is silent. A "philosophy," in a very usual sense of the word, is an organic whole of such 
extrarational decisions. It is in regard to "philosophy" in this sense that Marx's contention is 
largely true. But even in this sense a philosophy is determined by other social causes as well as by 
those that are economic. War, especially, has its share in historical causation; and vic- 


- 787 - 



tory in war does not always go to the side with the greatest economic resources. 

Marx fitted his philosophy of history into a mould suggested by Hegelian dialectic, but in fact 
there was only one triad that concerned him: feudalism, represented by the landowner; capitalism, 
represented by the industrial employer; and Socialism, represented by the wageeamer. Hegel 
thought of nations as the vehicles of dialectic movement; Marx substituted classes. He disclaimed 
always all ethical or humanitarian reasons for preferring Socialism or taking the side of the wage- 
eamer; he maintained, not that this side was ethically better, but that it was the side taken by the 
dialectic in its wholly detennnistic movement. He might have said that he did not advocate 
Socialism, but only prophesied it. This, however, would not have been wholly true. He 
undoubtedly believed every dialectical movement to be, in some impersonal sense, a progress, and 
he certainly held that Socialism, once established, would minister to human happiness more than 
either feudalism or capitalism have done. These beliefs, though they must have controlled his life, 
remained largely in the background so far as his writings are concerned. Occasionally, however, 
he abandons calm prophecy for vigorous exhortation to rebellion, and the emotional basis of his 
ostensibly scientific prognostications is implicit in all he wrote. 

Considered purely as a philosopher, Marx has grave shortcomings. He is too practical, too much 
wrapped up in the problems of his time. His purview is confined to this planet, and, within this 
planet, to Man. Since Copernicus, it has been evident that Man has not the cosmic importance 
which he formerly arrogated to himself. No man who has failed to assimilate this fact has a right 
to call his philosophy scientific. 

There goes with this limitation to terrestrial affairs a readiness to believe in progress as a universal 
law. This readiness characterized the nineteenth century, and existed in Marx as much as in his 
contemporaries. It is only because of the belief in the inevitability of progress that Marx thought it 
possible to dispense with ethical considerations. If Socialism was coming, it must be an 
improvement. He would have readily admitted that it would not seem to be an improvement to 
landowners or capitalists, but that only showed that they were out of harmony with the dialectic 
movement of the time. Marx 


- 788 - 



professed himself an atheist, but retained a cosmic optimism which only theism could justify. 

Broadly speaking, all the elements in Marx's philosophy which are derived from Hegel are 
unscientific, in the sense that there is no reason whatever to suppose them true. 

Perhaps the philosophic dress that Marx gave to his Socialism had really not much to do with 
the basis of his opinions. It is easy to restate the most important part of what he had to say 
without any reference to the dialectic. He was impressed by the appalling cruelty of the 
industrial system as it existed in England a hundred years ago, which he came to know 
thoroughly through Engels and the reports of Royal Commissions. He saw that the system was 
likely to develop from free competition towards monopoly, and that its injustice must produce a 
movement of revolt in the proletariat. He held that, in a thoroughly industrialized community, 
the only alternative to private capitalism is State ownership of land and capital. None of these 
propositions are matters for philosophy, and I shall therefore not consider their truth or 
falsehood. The point is that, if true, they suffice to establish what is practically important in his 
system. The Hegelian trappings might therefore be dropped with advantage. 

The history of Marx's reputation has been peculiar. In his own country his doctrines inspired the 
programme of the Social Democratic Party, which grew steadily until, in the general election of 
1912, it secured one third of all the votes cast. Immediately after the first world war, the Social 
Democratic Party was for a time in power, and Ebert, the first president of the Weimar 
Republic, was a member of it; but by this time the Party had ceased to adhere to Marxist 
orthodoxy. Meanwhile, in Russia, fanatical believers in Marx had acquired the government. In 
the West, no large working-class movement has been Marxist; the British Labour Party, at 
times, has seemed to move in that direction, but has nevertheless adhered to an empirical type 
of Socialism. Large numbers of intellectuals, however, have been profoundly influenced by 
him, both in England and in America. In Gennany all advocacy of his doctrines has been 
forcibly suppressed, but may be expected to revive when the Nazis are overthrown, fy 

Modern Europe and America have thus been divided, politically 


* I am writing in 1943. 


- 789 - 


and ideologically, into three camps. There are Liberals, who still, as far as may be, follow Locke 
or Bentham, but with varying degrees of adaptation to the needs of industrial organization. There 
are Marxists, who control the government in Russia, and are likely to become increasingly 
influential in various other countries. These two sections of opinion are philosophically not very 
widely separated; both are rationalistic, and both, in intention, are scientific and empirical. But 
from the point of view of practical politics the division is sharp. It appears already in the letter of 
James Mill quoted in the preceding chapter, saying "their notions of property look ugly." 

It must, however, be admitted that there are certain respects in which the rationalism of Marx is 
subject to limitations. Although he holds that his interpretation of the trend of development is true, 
and will be borne out by events, he believes that the argument will only appeal (apart from rare 
exceptions) to those whose class interest is in agreement with it. He hopes little from persuasion, 
everything from the class war. He is thus committed in practice to power politics, and to the 
doctrine of a master class, though not of a master race. It is true that, as a result of the social 
revolution, the division of classes is expected ultimately to disappear, giving place to complete 
political and economic harmony. But this is a distant ideal, like the Second Coming; in the 
meantime, there is war and dictatorship, and insistence upon ideological orthodoxy. 

The third section of modern opinion, represented politically by Nazis and Fascists, differs 
philosophically from the other two far more profoundly than they differ from each other. It is anti- 
rational and anti-scientific. Its philosophical progenitors are Rousseau, Fichte, and Nietzsche. It 
emphasizes will, especially will to power; this it believes to be mainly concentrated in certain 
races and individuals, who therefore have a right to rule. 

Until Rousseau, the philosophical world had a certain unity. This has disappeared for the time 
being, but perhaps not for long. It can be recovered by a rationalistic reconquest of men’s minds, 
but not in any other way, since claims to mastery can only breed strife. 


- 790 - 



CHAPTER XXVIII Bergson 

I 


HENRI BERGSON was the leading French philosopher of the present century. He influenced 
William James and Whitehead, and had a considerable effect upon French thought. Sorel, who 
was a vehement advocate of syndicalism and the author of a book called Reflections on 
Violence, used Bergsonian irrationalism to justify a revolutionary labour movement having no 
definite goal. In the end, however, Sorel abandoned syndicalism and became a royalist. The 
main effect of Bergson's philosophy was conservative, and it harmonized easily with the 
movement which culminated in Vichy. But Bergson's irrationalism made a wide appeal quite 
unconnected with politics, for instance to Bernard Shaw, whose Back to Methuselah is pure 
Bergsonism. Forgetting politics, it is in its purely philosophical aspect that we must consider it. 
I have dealt with it somewhat fully as it exemplifies admirably the revolt against reason which, 
beginning with Rousseau, has gradually dominated larger and larger areas in the life and 
thought of the world. 

The classification of philosophies is effected, as a rule, either by their methods or by their 
results: "empirical" and "a priori" is a classification by methods, "realist" and "idealist" is a 
classification by results. An attempt to classify Bergson's philosophy in either of these ways is 
hardly likely to be successful, since it cuts across all the recognized divisions. 

But there is another way of classifying philosophies, less precise, but perhaps more helpful to 
the non-philosophical; in this way, the principle of division is according to the predominant 
desire which 


* The remainder of this chapter is in the main a reprint of an article published in The Monist 
for 1912. 


- 791 - 


has led the philosopher to philosophize. Thus we shall have philosophies of feeling, inspired by 
the love of happiness, theoretical philosophies, inspired by the love of knowledge; and practical 
philosophies, inspired by the love of action. 

Among philosophies of feeling we shall place all those which are primarily optimistic or 
pessimistic, all those that offer schemes of salvation or try to prove that salvation is impossible; to 
this class belong most religious philosophies. Among theoretical philosophies we shall place most 
of the great systems; for though the desire for knowledge is rare, it has been the source of most of 
what is best in philosophy. Practical philosophies, on the other hand, will be those which regard 
action as the supreme good, considering happiness an effect and knowledge a mere instrument of 
successful activity. Philosophies of this type would have been common among Western 
Europeans if philosophers had been average men; as it is, they have been rare until recent times; in 
fact their chief representatives are the pragmatists and Bergson. In the rise of this type of 
philosophy we may see, as Bergson himself does, the revolt of the modern man of action against 
the authority of Greece, and more particularly of Plato; or we may connect it, as Dr. Schiller 
apparently would, with imperialism and the motorcar. The modern world calls for such a 
philosophy, and the success which it has achieved is therefore not surprising. 

Bergson's philosophy, unlike most of the systems of the past, is dualistic: the world, for him, is 
divided into two disparate portions, on the one hand life, on the other matter, or rather that inert 
something which the intellect views as matter. The whole universe is the clash and conflict of two 
opposite motions: life, which climbs upward, and matter, which falls downward. Life is one great 
force, one vast vital impulse, given once for all from the beginning of the world, meeting the 
resistance of matter, struggling to break a way through matter, learning gradually to use matter by 
means of organization; divided by the obstacles it encounters into diverging currents, like the 
wind at the street-comer; partly subdued by matter through the very adaptations which matter 
forces upon it; yet retaining always its capacity for free activity, struggling always to find new 
outlets, seeking always for greater liberty of movement amid the opposing walls of matter. 

Evolution is not primarily explicable by adaptation to environment; 


- 792 - 



adaptation explains only the turns and twists of evolution, like the windings of a road approaching 
a town through hilly country. But this simile is not quite adequate; there is no town, no definite 
goal, at the end of the road along which evolution travels. Mechanism and teleology suffer from 
the same defect: both suppose that there is no essential novelty in the world. Mechanism regards 
the future as implicit in the past, since it believes that the end to be achieved can be known in 
advance, denies that any essential novelty is contained in the result. 

As against both these views, though with more sympathy for teleology than for mechanism, 
Bergson maintains that evolution is truly creative, like the work of an artist. An impulse to action, 
an undefined want, exists beforehand, but until the want is satisfied it is impossible to know the 
nature of what will satisfy it. For example, we may suppose some vague desire in sightless 
animals to be able to be aware of objects before they were in contact with them. This led to efforts 
which finally resulted in the creation of eyes. Sight satisfied the desire, but could not have been 
imagined beforehand. For this reason, evolution is unpredictable, and detenninism cannot refute 
the advocates of free will. 

This broad outline is filled in by an account of the actual development of life on the earth. The 
first division of the current was into plants and animals; plants aimed at storing up energy in a 
reservoir, animals aimed at using energy for sudden and rapid movements. But among animals, at 
a later stage, a new bifurcation appeared: instinct and intellect became more or less separated. 

They are never wholly without each other, but in the main intellect is the misfortune of man, while 
instinct is seen at its best in ants, bees, and Bergson. The division between intellect and instinct is 
fundamental in his philosophy, much of which is a kind of Sandford and Merton, with instinct as 
the good boy and intellect as the bad boy. 

Instinct at its best is called intuition. "By intuition," he says, "I mean instinct that has become 
disinterested, self-conscious, capable of reflecting upon its object and of enlarging it indefinitely." 
The account of the doings of intellect is not always easy to follow, but if we are to understand 
Bergson we must do our best. 

Intelligence or intellect, "as it leaves the hands of nature, has for its chief object the inorganic 
solid"; it can only form a clear idea of 


- 793 - 



the discontinuous and immobile; its concepts are outside each other like objects in space, and have 
the same stability. The intellect separates in space and fixes in time; it is not made to think 
evolution, but to represent becoming as a series of states. "The intellect is characterized by a 
natural inability to understand life"; geometry and logic, which are its typical products, are strictly 
applicable to solid bodies, but elsewhere reasoning must be checked by common sense, which, as 
Bergson truly says, is a very different thing. Solid bodies, it would seem, are something which 
mind has created on purpose to apply intellect to them, much as it has created chess-boards in 
order to play chess on them. The genesis of intellect and the genesis of material bodies, we are 
told, are correlative; both have been developed by reciprocal adaptation. "An identical process 
must have cut out matter and the intellect, at the same time, from a stuff that contained both." 

This conception of the simultaneous growth of matter and intellect is ingenious, and deserves to 
be understood. Broadly, I think, what is meant is this: Intellect is the power of seeing things as 
separate one from another, and matter is that which is separated into distinct things. In reality 
there are no separate solid things, only an endless stream of becoming, in which nothing becomes 
and there is nothing that this nothing becomes. But becoming may be a movement up or a 
movement down: when it is a movement up it is called life, when it is a movement down it is 
what, as misapprehended by the intellect, is called matter. I suppose the universe is shaped like a 
cone, with the Absolute at the vertex, for the movement up brings things together, while the 
movement down separates them, or at least seems to do so. In order that the upward motion of 
mind may be able to thread its way through the downward motion of the falling bodies which hail 
upon it, it must be able to cut out paths between them; thus as intelligence was fonned, outlines 
and paths appeared, and the primitive flux was cut up into separate bodies. The intellect may be 
compared to a carver, but it has the peculiarity of imagining that the chicken always was the 
separate pieces into which the carving-knife divides it. 

"The intellect," Bergson says, "always behaves as if it were fascinated by the contemplation of 
inert matter. It is life looking outward, putting itself outside itself, adopting the ways of 
unorganized nature in principle, in order to direct them in fact." If we may be allowed to add 
another image to the many by which Bergson's philosophy is 


- 794 - 



illustrated, we may say that the universe is a vast funicular railway, in which life is the train that 
goes up, and matter is the train that goes down. The intellect consists in watching the descending 
train as it passes the ascending train in which we are. The obviously nobler faculty which 
concentrates its attention on our own train is instinct or intuition. It is possible to leap from one 
train to the other; this happens when we become the victims of automatic habit, and is the essence 
of the comic. Or we can divide ourselves into parts, one part going up and one down; then only 
the part going down is comic. But intellect is not itself a descending motion, it is merely an 
observation of the descending motion by the ascending motion. 

Intellect, which separates things, is, according to Bergson, a kind of dream; it is not active, as all 
our life ought to be, but purely contemplative. When we dream, he says, our self is scattered, our 
past is broken into fragments, things which really interpenetrate each other are seen as separate 
solid units: the extra-spatial degrades itself into spatiality, which is nothing but separateness. Thus 
all intellect, since it separates, tends to geometry; and logic, which deals with concepts that lie 
wholly outside each other, is really an outcome of geometry, following the direction of materiality. 
Both deduction and induction require spatial intuition behind them; "the movement at the end of 
which is spatiality lays down along its course the faculty of induction, as well as that of deduction, 
in fact, intellectuality entire." It creates them in mind, and also the order in things which the 
intellect finds there. Thus logic and mathematics do not represent a positive spiritual effort, but a 
mere somnambulism, in which the will is suspended, and the mind is no longer active. Incapacity 
for mathematics is therefore a sign of grace— fortunately a very common one. 

As intellect is connected with space, so instinct or intuition is connected with time. It is one of the 
noteworthy features of Bergson's philosophy that, unlike most writers, he regards time and space 
as profoundly dissimilar. Space, the characteristic of matter, arises from a dissection of the flux 
which is really illusory, useful, up to a certain point, in practice, but utterly misleading in theory. 
Time, on the contrary, is the essential characteristic of life or mind. "Wherever anything lives," he 
says, "there is, open somewhere, a register in which time is being inscribed." But the time here 
spoken of is not mathematical time, the homogeneous assemblage of mutually external in- 


- 795 - 



stants. Mathematical time, according to Bergson, is really a fonn of space; the time which is of the 
essence of life is what he calls duration. This conception of duration is fundamental in his 
philosophy; it appears already in his earliest book Time and Free Will, and it is necessary to 
understand it if we are to have any comprehension of his system. It is, however, a very difficult 
conception. I do not fully understand it myself, and therefore I cannot hope to explain it with all 
the lucidity which it doubtless deserves. 

"Pure duration," we are told, "is the form which our conscious states assume when our ego lets 
itself live, when it refrains from separating its present state from its former states." It forms the 
past and the present into one organic whole, where there is mutual penetration, succession without 
distinction. "Within our ego, there is succession without mutual externality; outside the ego, in 
pure space, there is mutual externality without succession." 

"Questions relating to subject and object, to their distinction and their union, should be put in 
terms of time rather than of space." In the duration in which we see ourselves acting, there are 
dissociated elements; but in the duration in which we act, our states melt into each other. Pure 
duration is what is most removed from externality and least penetrated with externality, a duration 
in which the past is big with a present absolutely new. But then our will is strained to the utmost; 
we have to gather up the past which is slipping away, and thrust it whole and undivided into the 
present. At such moments we truly possess ourselves, but such moments are rare. Duration is the 
very stuff of reality, which is perpetual becoming, never something made. 

It is above all in memory that duration exhibits itself, for in memory the past survives in the 
present. Thus the theory of memory becomes of great importance in Bergson's philosophy. Matter 
and Memory is concerned to show the relation of mind and matter, of which both are affirmed to 
be real, by an analysis of memory, which is "just the intersection of mind and matter." 

There are, he says, two radically different things, both of which are commonly called memory, the 
distinction between these two is much emphasised by Bergson. "The past survives," he says, 
"under two distinct fonns: first, in motor mechanisms; secondly, in independent recollections." 

For example, a man is said to remember a 


- 796 - 



poem if he can repeat it by heart, that is to say, if he has acquired a certain habit or mechanism 
enabling him to repeat a former action. But he might, at least theoretically, be able to repeat the 
poem without any recollection of the previous occasions on which he has read it; thus there is no 
consciousness of past events involved in this sort of memory. The second sort, which alone really 
deserves to be called memory, is exhibited in recollections of separate occasions when he has read 
the poem, each unique and with a date. Here, he thinks, there can be no question of habit, since 
each event only occurred once, and had to make its impression immediately. It is suggested that in 
some way everything that has happened to us is remembered, but as a rule, only what is useful 
comes into consciousness. Apparent failures of memory, it is argued, are not really failures of the 
mental part of memory, but of the motor mechanism for bringing memory into action. This view is 
supported by a discussion of brain physiology and the facts of amnesia, from which it is held to 
result that true memory is not a function of the brain. The past must be acted by matter, imagined 
by mind. Memory is not an emanation of matter; indeed the contrary would be nearer the truth if 
we mean matter as grasped in concrete perception, which always occupies a certain duration. 

"Memory must be, in principle, a power absolutely independent of matter. If, then, spirit is a 
reality, it is here, in the phenomena of memory, that we may come into touch with it 
experimentally." 

At the opposite end from pure memory Bergson places pure perception, in regard to which he 
adopts an ultra-realist position. "In pure perception," he says, "we are actually placed outside 
ourselves, we touch the reality of the object in an immediate intuition." So completely does he 
identify perception with its object that he almost refuses to call it mental at all. "Pure perception," 
he says, "which is the lowest degree of mind— mind without memory— is really part of matter, as 
we understand matter." Pure perception is constituted by dawning action, its actuality lies in its 
activity. It is in this way that the brain becomes relevant to perception, for the brain is not an 
instrument of action. The function of the brain is to limit our mental life to what is practically 
useful. But for the brain, one gathers, everything would be perceived, but in fact we only perceive 
what interests us. "The body, always turned towards action, has for its essential 


- 797 - 



function to limit, with a view to action, the life of the spirit." It is, in fact, an instrument of choice. 

We must now return to the subject of instinct or intuition, as opposed to intellect. It was necessary 
first to give some account of duration and memory, since Bergson's theories of duration and 
memory are presupposed in this account of intuition. In man, as he now exists, intuition is the 
fringe or penumbra of intellect: it has been thrust out of the centre by being less useful in action 
than intellect, but it has deeper uses which make it desirable to bring it back into greater 
prominence. Bergson wishes to make intellect "turn inwards on itself, and awaken the 
potentialities of intuition which still slumber within it." The relation between instinct and intellect 
is compared to that between sight and touch. Intellect, we are told, will not give knowledge of 
things at a distance; indeed the function of science is said to be to explain all perceptions in terms 
of touch. 

"Instinct alone," he says, "is knowledge at a distance. It has the same relation to intelligence that 
vision has to touch." We may observe in passing that, as appears in many passages, Bergson is a 
strong visualizer, whose thought is always conducted by means of visual images. 

The essential characteristic of intuition is that it does not divide the world into separate things, as 
the intellect does; although Bergson does not use these words, we might describe it as synthetic 
rather than analytic. It apprehends a multiplicity, but a multiplicity of interpenetrating processes, 
not of spatially external bodies. There are in truth no things: "things and states are only views, 
taken by our mind, of becoming. There are no things, there are only actions." This view of the 
world, which appears difficult and unnatural to intellect, is easy and natural to intuition. Memory 
affords no instance of what is meant, for in memory the past lives on into the present and 
interpenetrates it. Apart from mind, the world would be perpetually dying and being bom again; 
the past would have no reality, and therefore there would be no past. It is memory, with its 
correlative desire, that makes the past and the future real and therefore creates true duration and 
true time. Intuition alone can understand this mingling of past and future: to the intellect they 
remain external, spatially external as it were, to one another. Under the guidance of intuition, we 
perceive that "form is only a snapshot view of a transition," and the philosopher "will see the 
material world melt back into a single flux." 


- 798 - 



Closely connected with the merits of intuition are Bergson's doctrine of freedom and his praise of 
action. "In reality," he says, "a living being is a centre of action. It represents a certain sum of 
contingency entering into the world, that is to say, a certain quantity of possible action." The 
arguments against free will depend partly upon assuming that the intensity of psychical states is a 
quantity, capable, at least in theory, of numerical measurement; this view Bergson undertakes to 
refute in the first chapter of Time and Free Will. Partly the determinist depends, we are told, upon 
a confusion between true duration and mathematical time, which Bergson regards as really a fonn 
of space. Partly, again, the determinist rests his case upon the unwarranted assumption that, when 
the state of the brain is given, the state of the mind is theoretically determined. Bergson is willing 
to admit that the converse is true, that is to say, that the state of brain is detenninate when the state 
of mind is given, but he regards the mind as more differentiated than the brain, and therefore holds 
that many different states of mind may correspond to one state of brain. He concludes that real 
freedom is possible: "We are free when our acts spring from our whole personality, when they 
express it, when they have that indefinable resemblance to it which one sometimes finds between 
the artist and his work." 

In the above outline, I have in the main endeavoured merely to state Bergson's views, without 
giving the reasons adduced by him in favour of their truth. This is easier than it would be with 
most philosophers, since as a rule he does not give reasons for his opinions, but relies on their 
inherent attractiveness, and on the chann of an excellent style. Like advertisers, he relies upon 
picturesque and varied statement, and on apparent explanation of many obscure facts. Analogies 
and similes, especially, fonn a very large part of the whole process by which he recommends his 
views to the reader. The number of similes for life to be found in his works exceeds the number in 
any poet known to me. Life, he says, is like a shell bursting into fragments which are again shells. 
It is like a sheaf. Initially, it was "a tendency to accumulate in a reservoir, as do especially the 
green parts of vegetables." But the reservoir is to be filled with boiling water from which steam is 
issuing; "jets must be gushing out unceasingly, of which each, falling back, is a world." Again 
"life appears in its entirety as an immense wave which, starting from a centre, spreads outwards, 
and 


- 799 - 



which on almost the whole of its circumference is stopped and converted into oscillation: at one 
single point the obstacle has been forced, the impulsion has passed freely." Then there is the great 
climax in which life is compared to a cavalry charge. "All organized beings, from the humblest to 
the highest, from the first origins of life to the time in which we are, and in all places as in all 
times, do but evidence a single impulsion, the inverse of the movement of matter, and in itself 
indivisible. All the living hold together, and all yield to the same tremendous push. The animal 
takes its stand on the plant, man bestrides animality, and the whole of humanity, in space and in 
time, is one immense army galloping beside and before and behind each of us in an overwhelming 
charge able to beat down every resistance and to clear many obstacles, perhaps even death." 

But a cool critic, who feels himself a mere spectator, perhaps an unsympathetic spectator, of the 
charge in which man is mounted upon animality, may be inclined to think that calm and careful 
thought is hardly compatible with this form of exercise. When he is told that thought is a mere 
means of action, the mere impulse to avoid obstacles in the field, he may feel that such a view is 
becoming in a cavalry officer, but not in a philosopher, whose business, after all, is with thought: 
he may feel that in the passion and noise of violent motion there is no room for the fainter music 
of reason, no leisure for the disinterested contemplation in which greatness is sought, not by 
turbulence, but by the greatness of the universe which is mirrored. In that case, he may be tempted 
to ask whether there are any reasons for accepting such a restless view of the world. And if he 
asks this question, he will find, if I am not mistaken, that there is no reason whatever for accepting 
this view, either in the universe or in the writings of M. Bergson. 

II 

The two foundations of Bergson's philosophy, in so far as it is more than an imaginative and 
poetic view of the world, are his doctrines of space and time. His doctrine of space is required for 
his condemnation of the intellect, and if he fails in his condemnation of the intellect, the intellect 
will succeed in its condemnation of him, for between the two 


- 800 - 



it is war to the knife. His doctrine of time is necessary for his vindication of freedom, for his 
escape from what William James called a "block universe," for his doctrine of a perpetual flux in 
which there is nothing that flows, and for his whole account of the relations between mind and 
matter. It will be well, therefore, in criticism, to concentrate on these two doctrines. If they are 
true, such minor errors and inconsistencies as no philosopher escapes would not greatly matter; 
while if they are false, nothing remains except an imaginative epic, to be judged on aesthetic 
rather than on intellectual grounds. I shall begin with the theory of space, as being the simpler of 
the two. 

Bergson's theory of space occurs fully and explicitly in his Time and Free Will, and therefore 
belongs to the oldest parts of his philosophy. In his first chapter, he contends that greater and less 
imply space, since he regards the greater as essentially that which contains the less. He offers no 
arguments whatever, either good or bad, in favour of this view; he merely exclaims, as though he 
were giving an obvious reductio ad absurdum: "As if one could still speak of magnitude where 
there is neither multiplicity nor space!" The obvious cases to the contrary, such as pleasure and 
pain, afford him much difficulty, yet he never doubts or re-examines the dogma with which he 
starts. 

In his next chapter, he maintains the same thesis as regards number. "As soon as we wish to 
picture number to ourselves," he says, "and not merely figures or words, we are compelled to have 
recourse to an extended image," and "every clear idea of number implies a visual image in space." 
These two sentences suffice to show, as I shall try to prove, that Bergson does not know what 
number is, and has himself no clear idea of it. This is shown also by his definition: "Number may 
be defined in general as a collection of units, or speaking more exactly, as the synthesis of the one 
and the many." 

In discussing these statements, I must ask the reader's patience for a moment while I call attention 
to some distinctions which may at first appear pedantic, but are really vital. There are three 
entirely different things which are confused by Bergson in the above statements, namely: (1) 
number, the general concept applicable to the various particular numbers; (2) the various 
particular numbers; (3) the various collections to which the various particular numbers are 
applicable. It is this last that is defined by Bergson when he says that number is a collection of 
units. The twelve apostles, the twelve tribes 


- 801 - 



of Israel, the twelve months, the twelve signs of the zodiac, are all collections of units, yet no one 
of them is the number 12, still less is it number in general, as by the above definition it ought to 
be. The number 12, obviously, is something which all these collections have in common, but 
which they do not have in common with other collections, such as cricket elevens. Hence the 
number 12 is neither a collection of twelve terms, nor is it something which all collections have in 
common; and number in general is a property of 12 or 11 or any other number, but not of the 
various collections that have twelve terms or eleven terms. 

Hence when, following Bergson's advice, we "have recourse to an extended image" and picture, 
say, twelve dots such as are obtained by throwing double sixes at dice, we have still not obtained a 
picture of the number 12. The number 12, in fact, is something more abstract than any picture. 
Before we can be said to have any understanding of the number 12, we must know what different 
collections of twelve units have in common, and this is something which cannot be pictured 
because it is abstract. Bergson only succeeds in making his theory of number plausible by 
confusing a particular collection with the number of its terms, and this again with number in 
general. 

The confusion is the same as if we confused a particular young man with youth, and youth with 
the general concept "period of human life," and were then to argue that because a young man has 
two legs, youth must have two legs, and the general concept "period of human life" must have two 
legs. The confusion is important because, as soon as it is perceived, the theory that number or 
particular numbers can be pictured in space is seen to be untenable. This not only disproves 
Bergson's theory as to number, but also his more general theory that all abstract ideas and all logic 
are derived from space. 

But apart from the question of numbers, shall we admit Bergson’s contention that every plurality 
of separate units involves space? Some of the cases that appear to contradict this view are 
considered by him, for example successive sounds. When we hear the steps of a passer-by in the 
street, he says, we visualise his successive positions; when we hear the strokes of a bell, we either 
picture it swinging backwards and forwards, or we range the successive sounds in an ideal space. 
But these are mere autobiographical observations of a visualizer, and illustrate the remark we 
made before, that Bergson's views depend upon 


- 802 - 



the predominance of the sense of sight in him. There is no logical necessity to range the strokes of 
a clock in an imaginary space: most people, I imagine, count them without any spatial auxiliary. 
Yet no reason is alleged by Bergson for the view that space is necessary. He assumes this as 
obvious, and proceeds at once to apply it to the case of times. Where there seem to be different 
times outside each other, he says, the times are pictured as spread out in space; in real time, such 
as is given by memory, different times interpenetrate each other, and cannot be counted because 
they are not separate. 

The view that all separateness implies space is now supposed established, and is used deductively 
to prove that space is involved wherever there is obviously separateness, however little other 
reason there may be for suspecting such a thing. Thus abstract ideas, for example, obviously 
exclude each other: whiteness is different from blackness, health is different from sickness, folly 
is different from wisdom. Hence all abstract ideas involve space; and therefore logic, which uses 
abstract ideas, is an offshoot of geometry, and the whole of the intellect depends upon a supposed 
habit of picturing things side by side in space. This conclusion, upon which Bergson’s whole 
condemnation of the intellect rests, is based, so far as can be discovered, entirely upon a personal 
idiosyncrasy mistaken for a necessity of thought, I mean the idiosyncrasy of visualizing 
successions as spread out on a line. The instance of numbers shows that, if Bergson were in the 
right, we could never have attained to the abstract ideas which are supposed to be thus 
impregnated with space; and conversely, the fact that we can understand abstract ideas (as 
opposed to particular things which exemplify them) seems sufficient to prove that he is wrong in 
regarding the intellect as impregnated with space. 

One of the bad effects of an anti-intellectual philosophy, such asthat of Bergson, is that it thrives 
upon the errors and confusions of the intellect. Hence it is led to prefer bad thinking to good, to 
declare every momentary difficulty insoluble, and to regard every foolish mistake as revealing the 
bankruptcy of intellect and the triumph of intuition. There are in Bergson's works many allusions 
to mathematics and science, and to a careless reader these allusions may seem to strengthen his 
philosophy greatly. As regards science, especially biology and physiology, 1 am not competent to 
criticize his interpretations. But as regards mathematics, he has deliberately preferred tra- 


- 803 - 



ditional errors in interpretation to the more modern views which have prevailed among 
mathematicians for the last eighty years. In this matter, he has followed the example of most 
philosophers. In the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, the infinitesimal calculus, though 
well developed as a method, was supported, as regards its foundations, by many fallacies and 
much confused thinking. Hegel and his followers seized upon these fallacies and confusions, to 
support them in their attempt to prove all mathematics self-contradictory. Thence the Hegelian 
account of these matters passed into the current thought of philosophers, where it has remained 
long after the mathematicians have removed all the difficulties upon which the philosophers rely. 
And so long as the main object of philosophers is to show that nothing can be learned by patience 
and detailed thinking, but that we ought rather to worship the prejudices of the ignorant under the 
title of "reason" if we are Hegelians, or of "intuition" if we are Bergsonians, so long philosophers 
will take care to remain ignorant of what mathematicians have done to remove the errors by which 
Hegel profited. 

Apart from the question of number, which we have already considered, the chief point at which 
Bergson touches mathematics is his rejection of what he calls the "cinematographic" 
representation of the world. Mathematics conceives change, even continuous change, as 
constituted by a series of states; Bergson, on the contrary, contends that no series of states can 
represent what is continuous, and that in change a thing is never in any state at all. The view that 
change is constituted by a series of changing states he calls cinematographic; this view, he says, is 
natural to the intellect, but is radically vicious. True change can only be explained by true 
duration; it involves an interpenetration of past and present, not a mathematical succession of 
static states. This is what is called a "dynamic" instead of a "static" view of the world. The 
question is important, and in spite of its difficulty we cannot pass it by. 

Bergson's position is illustrated— and what is to be said in criticism may also be aptly illustrated— 
by Zeno's argument of the arrow. Zeno argues that, since the arrow at each moment simply is 
where it is, therefore the arrow in its flight is always at rest. At first sight, this argument may not 
appear a very powerful one. Of course, it will be said, the arrow is where it is at one moment, but 
at another moment it is somewhere else, and this is just what constitutes motion. Certain 


- 804 - 



difficulties, it is true, arise out of the continuity of motion, if we insist upon assuming that motion 
is also discontinuous. These difficulties, thus obtained, have long been part of the stock-in-trade 
of philosophers. But if, with the mathematicians, we avoid the assumption that motion is also 
discontinuous, we shall not fall into the philosopher’s difficulties. A cinematograph in which there 
are an infinite number of pictures, and in which there is never a next picture because an infinite 
number come between any two, will perfectly represent a continuous motion. Wherein, then, lies 
the force of Zeno's argument? 

Zeno belonged to the Eleatic school, whose object was to prove that there could be no such thing 
as change. The natural view to take of the world is that there are things which change', for 
example, there is an arrow which is now here, now there. By bisection of this view, philosophers 
have developed two paradoxes. The Eleatics said that there were things but no changes; Heraclitus 
and Bergson said there were changes but no things. The Eleatics said there was an arrow, but no 
flight; Heraclitus and Bergson said there was a flight but no arrow. Each party conducted its 
argument by refutation of the other party. How ridiculous to say there is no arrow! say the "static" 
party. How ridiculous to say there is no flight! say the "dynamic" party. The unfortunate man who 
stands in the middle and maintains that there is both the arrow and its flight is assumed by the 
disputants to deny both; he is therefore pierced, like Saint Sebastian, by the arrow from one side 
and by its flight from the other. But we have still not discovered wherein lies the force of Zeno's 
argument. 

Zeno assumes, tacitly, the essence of the Bergsonian theory of change. That is to say, he assumes 
that when a thing is in a process of continuous change, even if it is only change of position, there 
must be in the thing some internal state of change. The thing must, at each instant, be intrinsically 
different from what it would be if it were not changing. He then points out that at each instant the 
arrow simply is where it is, just as it would be if it were at rest. Hence he concludes that there can 
be no such thing as a state of motion, and therefore, adhering to the view that a state of motion is 
essential to motion, he infers that there can be no motion and that the arrow is always at rest. 

Zeno's argument, therefore, though it does not touch the mathematical account of change, does, 
prima facie, refute a view of change which is not unlike Bergson’s. How, then, does Bergson meet 


- 805 - 



Zeno's argument? He meets it by denying that the arrow is ever anywhere. After stating Zeno's 
argument, he replies: "Yes, if we suppose that the arrow can ever be in a point of its course. Yes, 
again, if the arrow, which is moving, ever coincides with a position, which is motionless. But the 
arrow never is in any point of its course." This reply to Zeno, or a closely similar one concerning 
Achilles and the Tortoise, occurs in all his three books. Bergson’s view, plainly, is paradoxical; 
whether it is possible, is a question which demands a discussion of his view of duration. His only 
argument in its favor is the statement that the mathematical view of change "implies the absurd 
proposition that movement is made of immobilities." But the apparent absurdity of this view is 
merely due to the verbal form in which he has stated it, and vanishes as soon as we realize that 
motion implies relations. A friendship, for example, is made out of people who are friends, but 
not out of friendships; a genealogy is made out of men, but not out of genealogies. So a motion is 
made out of what is moving, but not out of motions. It expresses the fact that a thing may be in 
different places at different times, and that the places may still be different however near together 
the times may be. Bergson’s argument against the mathematical view of motion, therefore, reduces 
itself, in the last analysis, to a mere play upon words. And with this conclusion we may pass on to 
a criticism of his theory of duration. 

Bergson's theory of duration is bound up with his theory of memory. According to this theory, 
things remembered survive in memory, and thus interpenetrate present things: past and present are 
not mutually external, but are mingled in the unity of consciousness. Action, he says, is what 
constitutes being; but mathematical time is a mere passive receptacle, which does nothing and 
therefore is nothing. The past, he says, is that which acts no longer, and the present is that which is 
acting. But in this statement, as indeed throughout his account of duration, Bergson is 
unconsciously assuming the ordinary mathematical time; without this, his statements are 
unmeaning. What is meant by saying "the past is essentially that which acts no longer" (his 
italics), except that the past is that of which the action is past? the words "no longer" are words 
expressive of the past; to a person who did not have the ordinary notion of the past as something 
outside the present, these words would have no meaning. Thus his definition is circular. What he 
says is, in effect, "the past is that of which the 


- 806 - 



action is in the past." As a definition, this cannot be regarded as a happy effort. And the same 
applies to the present. The present, we are told, is "that which is acting " (his italics). But the word 
"is" introduces just that idea of the present which was to be defined. The present is that which is 
acting as opposed to that which was acting or will be acting. That is to say, the present is that 
whose action is in the present, not in the past or in the future. Again the definition is circular. An 
earlier passage on the same page will illustrate the fallacy further. "That which constitutes our 
pure perception," he says, "is our dawning action. . . . The actuality of our perception thus lies in 
its activity, in the movements which prolong it, and not in its greater intensity: the past is only 
idea, the present is ideo-motor." This passage makes it quite clear that, when Bergson speaks of 
the past, he does not mean the past, but our present memory of the past. The past when it existed 
was just as active as the present is now; if Bergson’s account were correct, the present moment 
ought to be the only one in the whole history of the world containing any activity. In earlier times 
there were other perceptions, just as active, just as actual in their day, as our present perceptions; 
the past, in its day, was by no means only idea, but was in its intrinsic character just what the 
present is now. This real past, however, Bergson simply forgets; what he speaks of is the present 
idea of the past. The real past does not mingle with the present, since it is not part of it; but that is 
a very different thing. 

The whole of Bergson's theory of duration and time rests throughout on the elementary confusion 
between the present occurrence of a recollection and the past occurrence which is recollected. But 
for the fact that time is so familiar to us, the vicious circle involved in his attempt to deduce the 
past as what is no longer active would be obvious at once. As it is, what Bergson gives is an 
account of the difference between perception and recollection— both present facts— and what he 
believes himself to have given is an account of the difference between the present and the past. As 
soon as this confusion is realized, his theory of time is seen to be simply a theory which omits 
time altogether. 

The confusion between present remembering and the past event remembered, which seems to be 
at the bottom of Bergson’s theory of time, is an instance of a more general confusion which, if I 
am not mistaken, vitiates a great deal of his thought, and indeed a great deal 


- 807 - 



of the thought of most modern philosophers— I mean the confusion between an act of knowing and 
that which is known. In memory, the act of knowing is in the present, whereas what is kn own is in 
the past; thus by confusing them the distinction between past and present is blurred. 

Throughout Matter and Memory, this confusion between the act of knowing and the object known 
is indispensable. It is enshrined in the use of the word "image," which is explained at the very 
beginning of the book. He there states that, apart from philosophical theories, everything that we 
know consists of "images," which indeed constitute the whole universe. He says: "I call matter the 
aggregate of images, and perception of matter these same images referred to the eventual action of 
one particular image, my body." It will be observed that matter and the perception of matter, 
according to him, consist of the very same things. The brain, he says, is like the rest of the 
material universe, and is therefore an image if the universe is an image. 

Since the brain, which nobody sees, is not, in the ordinary sense, an image, we are not surprised at 
his saying that an image can be without being perceived', but he explains later on that, as regards 
images, the difference between being and being consciously perceived is only one of degree. This 
is perhaps explained by another passage in which he says: "What can be a non-perceived material 
object, an image not imaged, unless it is a kind of unconscious mental state?" Finally he says: 
"That every reality has a kinship, an analogy, in short a relation with consciousness— this is what 
we concede to idealism by the very fact that we term things 'images.'" Nevertheless he attempts to 
allay our initial doubt by saying that he is beginning at a point before any of the assumptions of 
philosophers have been introduced. "We will assume," he says, "for the moment that we know 
nothing of theories of matter and theories of spirit, nothing of the discussions as to the reality or 
ideality of the external world. Here I am in the presence of images." And in the new Introduction 
which he wrote for the English edition he says: "By 'image' we mean a certain existence which is 
more than that which the idealist calls a representation, but less than that which the realist calls a 
thing,— an existence placed half-way between the 'thing' and the 'representation.'" 

The distinction which Bergson has in mind in the above is not, I 


- 808 - 



think, the distinction between the imaging as a mental occurrence and the thing imaged as an 
object. He is thinking of the distinction between the thing as it is and thing as it appears. The 
distinction between subject and object, between the mind which thinks and remembers and has 
images on the one hand, and the objects thought about, remembered, or imaged— this distinction, 
so far as I can see, is wholly absent from his philosophy. Its absence is his real debt to idealism; 
and a very unfortunate debt it is. In the case of "images," as we have just seen, it enables him first 
to speak of images as neutral between mind and matter, then to assert that the brain is an image in 
spite of the fact that it has never been imaged, then to suggest that matter and the perception of 
matter are the same thing, but that a non-perceived image (such as the brain) is an unconscious 
mental state; while finally, the use of the word "image," though involving no metaphysical 
theories whatever, nevertheless implies that every reality has "a kinship, an analogy, in short a 
relation" with consciousness. 

All these confusions are due to the initial confusion of subjective and objective. The subject— a 
thought or an image or a memory— is a present fact in me; the object may be the law of gravitation 
or my friend Jones or the old Campanile of Venice. The subject is mental and is here and now. 
Therefore, if subject and object are one, the object is mental and is here and now; my friend Jones, 
though he believes himself to be in South America and to exist on his own account, is really in my 
head and exists in virtue of my thinking about him; St. Mark's Campanile, in spite of its great size 
and the fact that it ceased to exist forty years ago, still exists, and is to be found complete inside 
me. These statements are no travesty of Bergson's theories of space and time; they are merely an 
attempt to show what is the actual concrete meaning of those theories. 

The confusion of subject and object is not peculiar to Bergson, but is common to many idealists 
and many materialists. Many idealists say that the object is really the subject, and many 
materialists say that the subject is really the object. They agree in thinking these two statements 
very different, while yet holding that subject and object are not different. In this respect, we may 
admit, Bergson has merit, for he is as ready to identify subject with object as to identify object 
with subject. As soon as this identification is rejected, his whole system collapses: first his 
theories of space and time, then his belief in 


- 809 - 



real contingency, then his condemnation of intellect, and finally his account of the relations of 
mind and matter. 

Of course a large part of Bergson's philosophy, probably the part to which most of its popularity is 
due, does not depend upon argument, and cannot be upset by argument. His imaginative picture of 
the world, regarded as a poetic effort, is in the main not capable of either proof or disproof. 
Shakespeare says life's but a walking shadow, Shelley says it is like a dome of many-coloured 
glass, Bergson says it is a shell which bursts into parts that are again shells. If you like Bergson's 
image better, it is just as legitimate. 

The good which Bergson hopes to see realized in the world is action for the sake of action. All 
pure contemplation he calls "dreaming," and condemns by a whole series of uncomplimentary 
epithets: static, Platonic, mathematical, logical, intellectual. Those who desire some prevision of 
the end which action is to achieve are told that an end foreseen would be nothing new, because 
desire, like memory, is identified with its object. Thus we are condemned, in action, to be the 
blind slaves of instinct: the life- force pushes us on from behind, restlessly and unceasingly. There 
is no room in this philosophy for the moment of contemplative insight when, rising above the 
animal life, we become conscious of the greater ends that redeem man from the life of the brutes. 
Those to whom activity without purpose seems a sufficient good will find in Bergson's books a 
pleasing picture of the universe. But those to whom action, if it is to be of any value, must be 
inspired by some vision, by some imaginative foreshadowing of a world less painful, less unjust, 
less full of strife than the world of our every-day life, those, in a word, whose action is built on 
contemplation, will find in this philosophy nothing of what they seek, and will not regret that there 
is no reason to think it true. 


- 810 - 

CHAPTER XXIX WILLIAM JAMES 

WILLIAM JAMES ( 1 842-19 10)was primarily a psychologist, but was important in philosophy on 
two accounts: he invented the. doctrine which he called "radical empiricism," and he was one of 
the three protagonists of the theory called "pragmatism" or "instrumentalism." In later life he was, 
as he deserved to be, the recognized leader of American philosophy. He was led by the study of 
medicine to the consideration of psychology; his great book on the subject, published in 1890, had 
the highest possible excellence. I shall not, however, deal with it, since it was a contribution to 
science rather than to philosophy. 

There were two sides to William James's philosophical interests, one scientific, the other 
religious. On the scientific side, the study of medicine had given his thoughts a tendency towards 
materialism, which, however, was held in check by his religious emotions. His religious feelings 
were very Protestant, very democratic, and very full of a wannth of human kindness. He refused 
altogether to follow his brother Henry into fastidious snobbishness. "The prince of darkness," he 
said, "may be a gentleman, as we are told he is, but whatever the God of earth and heaven is, he 
can surely be no gentleman." This is a very characteristic pronouncement. 

His warm-heartedness and his delightful humour caused him to be almost universally beloved. 

The only man I know of who did not feel any affection for him was Santayana, whose doctor's 
thesis William James had described as "the perfection of rottenness." There was between these 
two men a temperamental opposition which nothing could have overcome. Santayana also liked 
religion, but in a very different way. He liked it aesthetically and historically, not as a help 
towards a moral life; as was natural, he greatly preferred Catholicism to Protestantism. He did not 
intellectually accept any of the Chrisdm 


- 811 - 



dogmas, but he was content that others should believe them, and himself appreciated what he 
regarded as the Christian myth. To James, such an attitude could not but appear immoral. He 
retained from his Puritan ancestry a deep-seated belief that what is of most importance is good 
conduct, and his democratic feeling made him unable to acquiesce in the notion of one truth for 
philosophers and another for the vulgar. The temperamental opposition between Protestant and 
Catholic persists among the unorthodox; Santayana was a Catholic free-thinker, William James a 
Protestant, however heretical. 

James doctrine of radical empiricism was first published in 1904, in an essay called "Does 
'Consciousness' Exist?" The main purpose of this essay was to deny that the subject-object 
relation is fundamental. It had, until then, been taken for granted by philosophers that there is a 
kind of occurrence called "knowing," in which one entity, the knower or subject, is aware of 
another, the thing known or the object. The knower was regarded as a mind or soul; the object 
kn own might be a material object, an eternal essence, another mind, or, in self-consciousness, 
identical with the knower. Almost everything in accepted philosophy was bound up with the 
dualism of subject and object. The distinction of mind and matter, the contemplative ideal, and the 
traditional notion of "truth," all need to be radically reconsidered if the distinction of subject and 
object is not accepted as fundamental. 

For my part, I am convinced that James was right on this matter, and would, on this ground alone, 
deserve a high place among philosophers. I had thought otherwise until he, and those who agreed 
with him, persuaded me of the truth of his doctrine. But let us proceed to his arguments. 

Consciousness, he says, "is the name of a nonentity, and has no right to a place among first 
principles. Those who still cling to it are clinging to a mere echo, the faint rumour left behind by 
the disappearing 'soul' upon the air of philosophy." There is, he continues, "no aboriginal stuff or 
quality of being, contrasted with that of which material objects are made, out of which our 
thoughts of them are made." He explains that he is not denying that our thoughts perfonn a 
function which is that of knowing, and that this function may be called "being conscious." What 
he is denying might be put crudely as the view that consciousness is a "thing." He holds that there 
is "only one primal stuff 


- 812 - 



or material," out of which everything in the world is composed. This stuff he calls "pure 
experience." Knowing, he says, is a particular sort of relation between two portions of pure 
experience. The subjectobject relation is derivative: "experience, I believe, has no such inner 
duplicity." A given undivided portion of experience can be in one context a knower, and in 
another something known. 

He defines "pure experience" as "the immediate flux of life which furnishes the material to our 
later reflection." 

It will be seen that this doctrine abolishes the distinction between mind and matter, if regarded as 
a distinction between two different kinds of what James calls "stuff." Accordingly those who 
agree with James in this matter advocate what they call "neutral monism," according to which the 
material of which the world is constructed is neither mind nor matter, but something anterior to 
both. James himself did not develop this implication of his theory; on the contrary, his use of the 
phrase "pure experience" points to a perhaps unconscious Berkeleian idealism. The word 
"experience" is one often used by philosophers, but seldom defined. Let us consider for a moment 
what it can mean. 

Common sense holds that many things which occur are not "experienced," for instance, events on 
the invisible side of the moon. Berkeley and Hegel, for different reasons, both denied this, and 
maintained that what is not experienced is nothing. Their arguments are now held by most 
philosophers to be invalid— rightly, in my opinion. If we are to adhere to the view that the "stuff 
of the world is "experience," we shall find it necessary to invent elaborate and unplausible 
explanations of what we mean by such things as the invisible side of the moon. And unless we are 
able to infer things not experienced from things experienced, we shall have difficulty in finding 
grounds for belief in the existence of anything except ourselves. James, it is true, denies this, but 
his reasons are not very convincing. 

What do we mean by "experience"? The best way to find an answer is to ask: What is the 
difference between an event which is not experienced and one which is? Rain seen or felt to be 
falling is experienced, but rain falling in the desert where there is no living thing is not 
experienced. Thus we arrive at our first point: there is no experience except where there is life. 
But experience is not coextensive with life. Many things happen to me which I do not notice; 
these I can 


- 813 - 



hardly be said to experience. Clearly I experience whatever I remember, but some things which I 
do not explicitly remember may have set up habits which still persist. The burnt child fears the 
fire, even if he has no recollection of the occasion on which he was burnt. I think we may say that 
an event is "experienced" when it sets up a habit. (Memory is one kind of habit.) It is obvious that 
habits are only set up in living organisms. A burnt poker does not fear the fire, however often it is 
made red-hot. On common-sense grounds, therefore, we shall say that "experience" is not 
coextensive with the "stuff' of the world. I do not myself see any valid reason for departing from 
common sense on this point. 

Except in this matter of "experience," I find myself in agreement with James's radical empiricism. 

It is otherwise with his pragmatism and "will to believe." The latter, especially, seems to me to be 
designed to afford a specious but sophistical defence of certain religious dogmas— a defence, 
moreover, which no whole-hearted believer could accept. 

The Will to Believe was published in 1896; Pragmatism, a New Name for Some Old Ways of 
Thinking was published in 1907. The doctrine of the latter is an amplification of that of the 
former. 

The Will to Believe argues that we are often compelled, in practice, to take decisions where no 
adequate theoretical grounds for a decision exist, for even to do nothing is still a decision. 
Religious matters, James says, come under this head; we have, he maintains, a right to adopt a 
believing attitude although "our merely logical intellect may not have been coerced." This is 
essentially the attitude of Rousseau's Savoyard vicar, but James's development is novel. 

The moral duty of veracity, we are told, consists of two coequal precepts: "believe truth," and 
"shun error." The sceptic wrongly attends only to the second, and thus fails to believe various 
truths which a less cautious man will believe. If believing truth and avoiding error are of equal 
importance, I may do well, when presented with an alternative, to believe one of the possibilities 
at will, for then I have an even chance of believing truth, whereas I have none if I suspend 
judgement. 

The ethic that would result if this doctrine were taken seriously is a very odd one. Suppose I meet 
a stranger in the-train, and I ask myself: "Is his name Ebenezer Wilkes Smith?" If I admit that I do 


- 814 - 



not know, I am certainly not believing truly about his none; whereas, if I decide to believe that that 
is his name, there is a chance that I may be believing truly. The sceptic, says James, is afraid of 
being duped, and through his fear may lose important truth; "what proof is there," he adds, "that 
dupery through hope is so much worse than dupery through fear?" It would seem to follow that, if 
I have been hoping for years to meet a man called Ebenezer Wilkes Smith, positive as opposed to 
negative veracity should prompt me to believe that this is the name of every stranger I meet, until I 
acquire conclusive evidence to the contrary. 

"But," you will say, "the instance is absurd, for, though you do not know the stranger's name, you 
do know that a very small percentage of mankind are called Ebenezer Wilkes Smith. You are 
therefore not in that state of complete ignorance that is presupposed in your freedom of choice." 
Now strange to say, James, throughout his essay, never mentions probability, and yet there is 
almost always some discoverable consideration of probability in regard to any question. Let it be 
conceded (though no orthodox believer would concede it) that there is no evidence either for or 
against any of the religions of the world. Suppose you are a Chinese, brought into contact with 
Confucianism, Buddhism, and Christianity. You are precluded by the laws of logic from 
supposing that each of the three is true. Let us suppose that Buddhism and Christianity each has an 
even chance, then, given that both cannot be true, one of them must be, and therefore 
Confucianism must be false. If all three are to have equal chances, each must be more likely to be 
false than true. In this sort of way James's principle collapses as soon as we are allowed to bring in 
considerations of probability. 

It is curious that, in spite of being an eminent phychologist, James allowed himself at this point a 
singular crudity. He spoke as if the only alternatives were complete belief or complete disbelief, 
ignoring all shades of doubt. Suppose, for instance, I am looking for a book in my shelves. I think, 
"It may be in this shelf," and I proceed to look; but I do not think, "It is in this shelf' until I see it. 
We habitually act upon hypotheses, but not precisely as we act upon what we consider certainties; 
for when we act upon an hypothesis we keep our eyes open for fresh evidence. 

The precept of veracity, it seems to me, is not such as James thinks. 


- 815 - 



It is, I should say: "Give to any hypothesis which is worth your while to consider just that degree 
of credence which the evidence warrants." And if the hypothesis is sufficiently important there is 
the additional duty of seeking further evidence. This is plain common sense, and in hannony with 
the procedure in the law courts, but it is quite different from the procedure recommended by 
James. 

It would be unfair to James to consider his will to believe in isolation; it was a transitional 
doctrine, leading by a natural development to pragmatism. Pragmatism, as it appears in James, is 
primarily a new definition of "truth." There were two other protagonists of pragmatism, F.C.S. 
Schiller and Dr. John Dewey. I shall consider Dr. Dewey in the next chapter; Schiller was of less 
importance than the other two. Between James and Dr. Dewey there is a difference of emphasis. 
Dr. Dewey's outlook is scientific, and his arguments are largely derived from an examination of 
scientific method, but James is concerned primarily with religion and morals. Roughly speaking, 
he is prepared to advocate any doctrine which tends to make people virtuous and happy; if it does 
so, it is "true" in the sense in which he uses that word. 

The principle of pragmatism, according to James, was first enunciated by C. S. Peirce, who 
maintained that, in order to attain clearness in our thoughts of an object, we need only consider 
what conceivable effects of a practical kind the object may involve. James, in elucidation, says 
that the function of philosophy is to find out what difference it makes to you or me if this or that 
world-formula is true. In this way theories become instruments, not answers to enigmas. 

Ideas, we are told by James, become true in so far as they help us to get into satisfactory relations 
with other parts of our experience: "An idea is 'true' so long as to believe it is profitable to our 
lives." Truth is one species of good, not a separate category. Truth happens to an idea; it is made 
true by events. It is correct to say, with the interectualists, that a true idea must agree with reality, 
but "agreeing" does not mean "copying." "To 'agree' in the widest sense with a reality can only 
mean to be guided either straight up to it or into its surroundings, or to be put into such working 
touch with it as to handle either it or something connected with it better than if we disagreed." He 
adds that "the 'true' is only the expedient in the way of our thinking ... in the long run and on the 
whole of course." 


- 816 - 



In other words, "our obligation to seek truth is part of our general obligation to do what pays." 

In a chapter on pragmatism and religion he reaps the harvest. "We cannot reject any hypothesis if 
consequences useful to life flow from it." "If the hypothesis of God works satisfactorily in the 
widest sense of the word, it is true." "We may well believe, on the proofs that religious experience 
affords, that higher powers exist and are at work to save the world on ideal lines similar to our 
own." 

I find great intellectual difficulties in this doctrine. It assumes that a belief is "true" when its 
effects are good. If this definition is to be useful— and if not it is condemned by the pragmatist's 
test— we must know (a) what is good, (b) what are the effects of this or that belief, and we must 
know these things before we can know that anything is "true," since it is only after we have 
decided that the effects of a belief are good that we have a right to call it "true." The result is an 
incredible complication. Suppose you want to know whether Columbus crossed the Atlantic in 

1492. You must not, as other people do, look it up in a book. You must first inquire what are the 
effects of this belief, and how they differ from the effects of believing that he sailed in 1491 or 

1493. This is difficult enough, but it is still more difficult to weigh the effects from an ethical 
point of view. You may say that obviously 1492 has the best effects, since it gives you higher 
grades in examinations. But your competitors, who would surpass you if you said 1491 or 1493, 
may consider your success instead of theirs ethically regrettable. Apart from examinations, I 
cannot think of any practical effects of the belief except in the case of a historian. 

But this is not the end of the trouble. You must hold that your estimate of the consequences of a 
belief, both ethical and factual, is true, for if it is false your argument for the truth of your belief is 
mistaken. But to say that your belief as to consequences is true is, according to James, to say that 
it has good consequences, and this in turn is only true if it has good consequences, and so on ad 
infinitum. Obviously this won’t do. 

There is another difficulty. Suppose I say there was such a person as Columbus, every one will 
agree that what I say is true. But why is it true? Because of a certain man of flesh and blood who 
lived 450 years ago— in short, because of the causes of my belief, not because of its effects. With 
James's definition, it might happen that "A exists" 


- 817 - 



is true although in fact A does not exist. I have always found that the hypothesis of Santa Claus 
"works satisfactorily in the widest sense of the word"; therefore "Santa Claus exists" is true, 
although Santa Claus does not exist. James says (I repeat): "If the hypothesis of God works 
satisfactorily in the widest sense of the word, it is true." This simply omits as unimportant the 
question whether God really is in His heaven; if He is a useful hypothesis, that is enough. God the 
Architect of the Cosmos is forgotten; all that is remembered is belief in God, and its effects upon 
the creatures inhabiting our petty planet. No wonder the Pope condemned the pragmatic fence of 
religion. 

We come here to a fundamental difference between James's religious outlook and that of religious 
people in the past. James is interested in religion as a human phenomenon, but shows little interest 
in the objects which religion contemplates. He wants people to be happy, and if belief in God 
makes them happy let them believe in Him. This, so far, is only benevolence, not philosophy; it 
becomes philosophy when it is said that if the belief makes them happy it is "true." To the man 
who desires an object of worship this is unsatisfactory. He is not concerned to say, "If I believed in 
God I should be happy"; he is concerned to say, "I believe in God and therefore I am happy." And 
when he believes in God, he believes in Him as he believes in the existence of Roosevelt or 
Churchill or Hitler; God, for him, is an actual Being, not merely a human idea which has good 
effects. It is this genuine belief that has the good effects, not James's emasculate substitute. It is 
obvious that if I say " Hitler exists" I do not mean "the effects of believing that Hitler exists are 
good." And to the genuine believer the same is true of God. 

James's doctrine is an attempt to build a superstructure of belief upon a foundation of scepticism, 
and like all such attempts it is dependent on fallacies. In his case the fallacies spring from an 
attempt to ignore all extra-human facts. Berkeleian idealism combined with scepticism causes him 
to substitute belief in God for God, and to pretend that this will do just as well. But this is only a 
form of the subjectivistic madness which is characteristic of most modern philosophy. 


- 818 - 



CHAPTER XXX John Dewey 


JOHN DEWEY, who was bom in 1859, is generally admitted to be the leading living philosopher 
of America. In this estimate I entirely concur. He has had a profound influence, not only among 
philosophers, but on students of education, aesthetics, and political theory. He is a man of the 
highest character, liberal in outlook, generous and kind in personal relations, indefatigable in 
work. With most of his opinions I am in almost complete agreement. Owing to my respect and 
admiration for him, as well as to personal experience of his kindness, I should wish to agree 
completely, but to my regret I am compelled to dissent from his most distinctive philosophical 
doctrine, namely the substitution of "inquiry" for "truth" as the fundamental concept of logic and 
theory of knowledge. 

Like William James, Dewey is a New Englander, and carries on the tradition of New England 
liberalism, which has been abandoned by some of the descendants of the great New Englanders of 
a hundred years ago. He has never been what might be called a "mere" philosopher. Education, 
especially, has been in the forefront of his interests, and his influence on American education has 
been profound. I, in my lesser way, have tried to have an influence on education very similar to 
his. Perhaps he, like me, has not always been satisfied with the practice of those who professed to 
follow his teaching, but any new doctrine, in practice, is bound to be subject to some extravagance 
and excess. This, however, does not matter so much as might be thought, because the faults of 
what is new are so much more easily seen than those of what is traditional. 

When Dewey became professor of philosophy at Chicago in 1894, pedagogy was included among 
his subjects. He founded a progressive school, and wrote much about education. What he wrote at 
this time was summed up in his book The School and Society ( 1899), which is 

- 819 - 



considered the most influential of all his writings. He has continued to write on education 
throughout his life, almost as much as on philosophy. 

Other social and political questions have also had a large share of his thought. Like myself, he was 
much influenced by visits to Russia and China, negatively in the first case, positively in the 
second. He was reluctantly a supporter of the first World War. He had an important part in the 
inquiry as to Trotsky's alleged guilt, and, while he was convinced that the charges were 
unfounded, he did not think that the Soviet regime would have been satisfactory if Trotsky instead 
of Stalin had been Lenin’s successor. He became persuaded that violent revolution leading to 
dictatorship is not the way to achieve a good society. Although very liberal in all economic 
questions, he has never been a Marxist. I heard him say once that, having emancipated himself 
with some difficulty from the traditional orthodox theology, he was not going to shackle himself 
with another. In all this his point of view is almost identical with my own. 

From the strictly philosophic point of view, the chief importance of Dewey's work lies in his 
criticism of the traditional notion of "truth," which is embodied in the theory that he calls 
"instrumentalism." Truth, as conceived by most professional philosophers, is static and final, 
perfect and eternal; in religious terminology, it may be identified with God’s thoughts, and with 
those thoughts which, as rational beings, we share with God. The perfect model of truth is the 
multiplication table, which is precise and certain and free from all temporal dross. Since 
Pythagoras, and still more since Plato, mathematics has been linked with theology, and has 
profoundly influenced the theory of knowledge of most professional philosophers. Dewey's 
interests are biological rather than mathematical, and he conceives thought as an evolutionary 
process. The traditional view would, of course, admit that men gradually come to know more, but 
each piece of knowledge, when achieved, is regarded as something final. Hegel, it is true, does not 
regard human knowledge in this way. He conceives human knowledge as an organic whole, 
gradually growing in every part, and not perfect in any part until the whole is perfect. But although 
the Hegelian philosophy influenced Dewey in his youth, it still has its Absolute, and its eternal 
world which is more real than the temporal process. These can have no place in Dewey's thought, 
for 


- 820 - 



which all reality is temporal, and process, though evolutionary, is not, as for Hegel, the unfolding 
of an eternal Idea. 

So far, I am in agreement with Dewey. Nor is this the end of my agreement. Before embarking 
upon discussion of the points as to which I differ, I will say a few words as to my own view of 
"truth." 

The first question is: What sort of thing is "true" or "false"? The simplest answer would be: a 
sentence. "Columbus crossed the ocean in 1492" is true; "Columbus crossed the ocean in 1776" is 
false. This answer is correct, but incomplete. Sentences are true or false, as the case may be, 
because they are "significant," and their significance depends upon the language used. If you were 
translating an account of Columbus into Arabic, you would have to alter "1492" into the 
corresponding year of the Mohammedan era. Sentences in different languages may have the same 
significance, and it is the significance, not the words, that detennines whether the sentence is 
"true" or "false." When you assert a sentence, you express a "belief," which may be equally well 
expressed in a different language. The "belief," whatever it may be, is what is "true" or "false" or 
"more or less true." Thus we are driven to the investigation of "belief." 

Now a belief, provided it is sufficiently simple, may exist without being expressed in words. It 
would be difficult, without using words, to believe that the ratio of the circumference of a circle to 
the diameter is approximately 3. 14159, or that Caesar, when he decided to cross the Rubicon, 
sealed the fate of the Roman republican constitution. But in simple cases unverbalized beliefs are 
common. Suppose, for instance, in descending a staircase, you make a mistake as to when you 
have got to the bottom: you take a step suitable for level ground, and come down with a bump. 

The result is a violent shock of surprise. You would naturally say, "I thought I was at the bottom," 
but in fact you were not thinking about the stairs, or you would not have made the mistake. Your 
muscles were adjusted in a way suitable to the bottom, when in fact you were not yet there. It was 
your body rather than your mind that made the mistake— at least that would be a natural way to 
express what happened. But in fact the distinction between mind and body is a dubious one. It will 
be better to speak of an "organism," leaving the division of its activities between the mind and the 
body undetennined. One can say, then: your organism was adjusted in a manner which would 
have been 


- 821 - 



suitable if you had been at the bottom, but in fact was not suitable. This failure of adjustment 
constituted error, and one may say that you were entertaining a false belief. 

The test of error in the above illustration is surprise. I think this is true generally of beliefs that 
can be tested. A false belief is one which, in suitable circumstances, will cause the person 
entertaining it to experience surprise, while a true belief will not have this effect. But although 
surprise is a good criterion when it is applicable, it does not give the meaning of the words "true" 
and "false," and is not always applicable. Suppose you are walking in a thunderstonn, and you say 
to yourself, "I am not at all likely to be struck by lightning." The next moment you are struck, but 
you experience no surprise, because you are dead. If one day the sun explodes, as Sir James Jeans 
seems to expect, we shall all perish instantly, and therefore not be surprised, but unless we expect 
the catastrophe we shall all have been mistaken. Such illustrations suggest objectivity in truth and 
falsehood: what is true (or false) is a state of the organism, but it is true (or false), in general, in 
virtue of occurrences outside the organism. Sometimes experimental tests are possible to 
detennine truth and falsehood, but sometimes they are not; when they are not, the alternative 
nevertheless remains, and is significant. 

I will not further develop my view of truth and falsehood, but will proceed to the examination of 
Dewey's doctrine. 

Dewey does not aim at judgements that shall be absolutely "true," or condemn their 
contradictories as absolutely "false." In his opinion there is a process called "inquiry," which is 
one fonn of mutual adjustment between an organism and its environment. If I wished, from my 
point of view, to go as far as possible towards agreeing with Dewey, I should begin by an analysis 
of "meaning" or "significance." Suppose for example you are at the Zoo, and you hear a voice 
through a megaphone saying, "A lion has just escaped." You will, in that case, act as you would if 
you saw the lion— that is to say, you will get away as quickly as possible. The sentence "a lion has 
escaped" means a certain occurrence, in the sense that it promotes the same behaviour as the 
occurrence would if you saw it. Broadly: a sentence S "means" an event E if it promotes behaviour 
which E would have promoted. If there has in fact been no such occurrence, the sentence is false. 
Just the same applies to a belief which is not expressed in words. One may 


- 822 - 



say: a belief is a state of an organism promoting behaviour such as a certain occurrence would 
promote if sensibly present; the occurrence which would promote this behaviour is the 
"significance" of the belief. This statement is unduly simplified, but it may serve to indicate the 
theory I am advocating. So far, I do not think that Dewey and I would disagree very much. But 
with his further developments I find myself in very definite disagreement. 

Dewey makes inquiry the essence of logic, not truth or knowledge. He defines inquiry as follows: 
"Inquiry is the controlled or directed transfonnation of an indeterminate situation into one that is 
so determinate in its constituent distinctions and relations as to convert the elements of the 
original situation into a unified whole." He adds that "inquiry is concerned with objective 
transformations of objective subject-matter." This definition is plainly inadequate. Take for 
instance the dealings of a drill-sergeant with a crowd of recruits, or of a bricklayer with a heap of 
bricks; these exactly fulfil Dewey's definition of "inquiry." Since he clearly would not include 
them, there must be an element in his notion of "inquiry" which he has forgotten to mention in his 
definition. What this element is, I shall attempt to determine in a moment. But let us first consider 
what emerges from the definition as it stands. 

It is clear that "inquiry," as conceived by Dewey, is part of the general process of attempting to 
make the world more organic. "Unified wholes" are to be the outcome of inquiries. Dewey's love 
of what is organic is due partly to biology, partly to the lingering influence of Hegel. Unless on the 
basis of an unconscious Hegelian metaphysic, I do not see why inquiry should be expected to 
result in "unified wholes." If I am given a pack of cards in disorder, and asked to inquire into their 
sequence, I shall, if I follow Dewey's prescription, first arrange them in order, and then say that 
this was the order resulting from inquiry. There will be, it is true, an "objective transfonnation of 
objective subject-matter" while I am arranging the cards, but the definition allows for this. If, at 
the end, I am told: "We wanted to know the sequence of the cards when they were given to you, 
not after you had re-arranged them," I shall, if I am a disciple of Dewey, reply: "Your ideas are 
altogether too static. I am a dynamic person, and when I inquire into any subject-matter I first alter 
it in such a way as to make the inquiry easy." The notion that such a procedure 


- 823 - 



is legitimate can only be justified by a Hegelian distinction of appearance and reality: the 
appearance may be confused and fragmentary, but the reality is always orderly and organic. 
Therefore when I arrange the cards I am only revealing their true eternal nature. But this part of 
the doctrine is never made explicit. The metaphysic of organism underlies Dewey's theories, but I 
do not know how far he is aware of this fact. 

Let us now try to find the supplement to Dewey's definition which is required in order to 
distinguish inquiry from other kinds of organizing activity, such as those of the drill-sergeant and 
the bricklayer. Formerly it would have been said that inquiry is distinguished by its purpose, 
which is to ascertain some truth. But for Dewey "truth" is to be defined in terms of "inquiry," not 
vice versa', he quotes with approval Peirce's definition: "Truth" is "the opinion which is fated to be 
ultimately agreed to by all who investigate." This leaves us completely in the dark as to what the 
investigators are doing, for we cannot, without circularity, say that they are endeavoring to 
ascertain the truth. 

I think Dr. Dewey's theory might be stated as follows. The relations of an organism to its 
environment are sometimes satisfactory to the organism, sometimes unsatisfactory. When they are 
unsatisfactory, the situation may be improved by mutual adjustment. When the alterations by 
means of which the situation is improved are mainly on the side of the organism— they are never 
wholly on either side-the process involved is called "inquiry." For example: during a battle you are 
mainly concerned to alter the environment, i.e., the enemy; but during the preceding period of 
reconnaissance you are mainly concerned to adapt your own forces to his dispositions. This earlier 
period is one of "inquiry." 

The difficulty of this theory, to my mind, lies in the severing of the relation between a belief and 
the fact or facts which would commonly be said to "verify" it. Let us continue to consider the 
example of a general planning a battle. His reconnaissance planes report to him certain enemy 
preparations, and he, in consequence, makes certain counter-preparations. Common sense would 
say that the reports upon which he acts are "true" if, in fact, the enemy have made the moves 
which they are said to have made, and that, in that case, the reports remain true even if the general 
subsequently loses the battle. This view 


- 824 - 



is rejected by Dr. Dewey. He does not divide beliefs into "true" and "false," but he still has two 
kinds of beliefs, which we will call "satisfactory" if the general wins, and "unsatisfactory" if he is 
defeated. Until the battle has taken place, he cannot tell what to think about the reports of his 
scouts. 

Generalizing, we may say that Dr. Dewey, like everyone else, divides beliefs into two classes, of 
which one is good and the other bad. He holds, however, that a belief may be good at one time 
and bad at another; this happens with imperfect theories which are better than their predecessors 
but worse than their successors. Whether a belief is good or bad depends upon whether the 
activities which it inspires in the organism entertaining the belief have consequences which are 
satisfactory or unsatisfactory to it. Thus a belief about some event in the past is to be classified as 
"good" or "bad," not according to whether the event really took place, but according to the future 
effects of the belief. The results are curious. Suppose somebody says to me: "Did you have coffee 
with your breakfast this morning?" If I am an ordinary person, I shall try to remember. But if I am 
a disciple of Dr. Dewey I shall say: "Wait a while; I must try two experiments before I can tell 
you." I shall then first make myself believe that I had coffee, and observe the consequences, if any; 
I shall then make myself believe that I did not have coffee, and again observe the consequences, if 
any. I shall then compare the two sets of consequences, to see which I found the more satisfactory. 
If there is a balance on one side I shall decide for that answer. If there is not, I shall have to 
confess that I cannot answer the question. 

But this is not the end of our troubles. How am I to know the consequences of believing that I had 
coffee for breakfast? If I say "the consequences are such-and-such," this in turn will have to be 
tested by its consequences before I can know whether what I have said was a "good" or a "bad" 
statement. And even if this difficulty were overcome, how am I to judge which set of 
consequences is the more satisfactory? One decision as to whether I had coffee may fill me with 
contentment, the other with determination to further the war effort. Each of these may be 
considered good, but until I have decided which is better I cannot tell whether I had coffee for 
breakfast. Surely this is absurd. 

Dewey's divergence from what has hitherto been regarded as com- 


- 825 - 



mon sense is due to his refusal to admit "facts" into his metaphysic, in the sense in which "facts" 
are stubborn and cannot be manipulated. In this it may be that common sense is changing, and that 
his view will not seem contrary to what common sense is becoming. 

The main difference between Dr. Dewey and me is that he judges a belief by its effects, whereas I 
judge it by its causes where a past occurrence is concerned. I consider such a belief "true," or as 
nearly "true" as we can make it, if it has a certain kind of relation (sometimes very complicated) to 
its causes. Dr. Dewey holds that it has "warranted assertability"~which he substitutes for "truth"— 
if it has certain kinds of effects. This divergence is connected with a difference of outlook on the 
world. The past cannot be affected by what we do, and therefore, if truth is detennined by what 
has happened, it is independent of present or future volitions; it represents, in logical form, the 
limitations on human power. But if truth, or rather "warranted assertability," depends upon the 
future, then, in so far as it is in our power to alter the future, it is in our power to alter what should 
be asserted. This enlarges the sense of human power and freedom. Did Caesar cross the Rubicon? 

I should regard an affirmative answer as unalterably necessitated by a past event. Dr. Dewey 
would decide whether to say yes or no by an appraisal of future events, and there is no reason why 
these future events could not be arranged by human power so as to make a negative answer the 
more satisfactory. If I find the belief that Caesar crossed the Rubicon very distasteful, I need not 
sit down in dull despair; I can, if I have enough skill and power, arrange a social environment in 
which the statement that he did not cross the Rubicon will have "warranted assertability." 

Throughout this book, I have sought, where possible, to connect philosophies with the social 
environment of the philosophers concerned. It has seemed to me that the belief in human power, 
and the unwillingness to admit "stubborn facts," were connected with the hopefulness engendered 
by machine production and the scientific manipulation of our physical environment. This view is 
shared by many of Dr. Dewey's supporters. Thus George Raymond Geiger, in a laudatory essay, 
says that Dr. Dewey's method "would mean a revolution in thought just as middle-class and 
unspectacular, but just as stupendous, as the revolution in industry of a century ago." It seemed to 
me that I was saying the same thing when I wrote: "Dr. 


- 826 - 



Dewey has an outlook which, where it is distinctive, is in harmony with the age of industrialism 
and collective enterprise. It is natural that his strongest appeal should be to Americans, and also 
that he should be almost equally appreciated by the progressive elements in countries like China 
and Mexico." 

To my regret and surprise, this statement, which I had supposed completely innocuous, vexed Dr. 
Dewey, who replied: "Mr. Russell's confirmed habit of connecting the pragmatic theory of 
knowing with obnoxious aspects of American industrialism ... is much as if I were to link his 
philosophy to the interests of the English landed aristocracy." 

For my part, I am accustomed to having my opinions explained (especially by Communists) as 
due to my connection with the British aristocracy, and I am quite willing to suppose that my 
views, like other men's, are influenced by social environment. But if, in regard to Dr. Dewey, I am 
mistaken as to the social influences concerned, I regret the mistake. I find, however, that I am not 
alone in having made it. Santayana, for instance, says: "In Dewey, as in current science and ethics, 
there is a pervasive quasi-Hegelian tendency to dissolve the individual into his social functions, as 
well as everything substantial and actual into something relative and transitional." 

Dr. Dewey's world, it seems to me, is one in which human beings occupy the imagination; the 
cosmos of astronomy, though of course acknowledged to exist, is at most times ignored. His 
philosophy is a power philosophy, though not, like Nietzsche's, a philosophy of individual power; 
it is the power of the community that is felt to be valuable. It is this element of social power that 
seems to me to make the philosophy of instrumentalism attractive to those who are more 
impressed by our new control over natural forces than by the limitations to which that control is 
still subject. 

The attitude of man towards the non-human environment has differed profoundly at different 
times. The Greeks, with their dread of hubris and their belief in a Necessity or Fate superior even 
to Zeus, carefully avoided what would have seemed to them insolence towards the universe. The 
Middle Ages carried submission much further: humility towards God was a Christian's first duty. 
Initiative was cramped by this attitude, and great originality was scarcely possible. The 
Renaissance restored human pride, but carried it to the point 


- 827 - 



where it led to anarchy and disaster. Its work was largely undone by the Reformation and the 
Counter-reformation. But modern technique, while not altogether favourable to the lordly 
individual of the Renaissance, has revived the sense of the collective power of human 
communities. Man, formerly too humble, begins to think of himself as almost a God. The Italian 
pragmatist Papini urges us to substitute the "Imitation of God" for the "Imitation of Christ." 

In all this I feel a grave danger, the danger of what might be called cosmic impiety. The concept of 
"truth" as something dependent upon facts largely outside human control has been one of the ways 
in which philosophy hitherto has inculcated the necessary element of humility. When this check 
upon pride is removed, a further step is taken on the road towards a certain kind of madness— the 
intoxication of power which invaded philosophy with Fichte, and to which modern men, whether 
philosophers or not, are prone. I am persuaded that this intoxication is the greatest danger of our 
time, and that any philosophy which, however unintentionally, contributes to it is increasing the 
danger of vast social disaster. 

CHAPTER XXXI The Philosophy of Logical Analysis 

IN philosophy ever since the time of Pythagoras there has been an opposition between the men 
whose thought was mainly inspired by mathematics and those who were more influenced by the 
empirical sciences. Plato, Thomas Aquinas, Spinoza, and Kant belong to what may be called the 
mathematical party; Democritus, Aristotle, and the modem empiricists from Locke onwards, 
belong to the opposite party. In our day a school of philosophy has arisen which sets to work to 
eliminate Pythagoreanism from the principles 


of mathematics, and to combine empiricism with an interest in the deductive parts of human 
knowledge. The aims of this school are less spectacular than those of most philosophers in the 
past, but some of its achievements are as solid as those of the men of science. 

The origin of this philosophy is in the achievements of mathematicians who set to work to 
purge their subject of fallacies and slipshod reasoning. The great mathematicians of the 
seventeenth century were optimistic and anxious for quick results; consequently they left the 
foundations of analytical geometry and the infinitesimal calculus insecure. Leibniz believed in 
actual infinitesimals, but although this belief suited his metaphysics it had no sound basis in 
mathematics. Weierstrass, soon after the middle of the nineteenth century, showed how to 
establish the calculus without infinitesimals, and thus at last made it logically secure. Next 
came Georg Cantor, who developed the theory of continuity and infinite number. "Continuity" 
had been, until he defined it, a vague word, convenient for philosophers like Hegel, who 
wished to introduce metaphysical muddles into mathematics. Cantor gave a precise significance 
to the word, and showed that continuity, as he defined it, was the concept needed by 
mathematicians and physicists. By this means a great deal of mysticism, such as that of 
Bergson, was rendered antiquated. 

Cantor also overcame the long-standing logical puzzles about infinite number. Take the series 
of whole numbers from 1 onwards; how many of them are there? Clearly the number is not 
finite. Up to a thousand, there are a thousand numbers; up to a million, a million. Whatever 
finite number you mention, there are evidently more numbers than that, because from 1 up to 
the number in question there are just that number of numbers, and then there are others that are 
greater. The number of finite whole numbers must, therefore, be an infinite number. But now 
comes a curious fact: The number of even numbers must be the same as the number of all 
whole numbers. Consider the two rows: 


1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 



2, 4, 6, 8,10, 12,.... 


There is one entry in the lower row for every one in the top row; therefore the number of terms 
in the two rows must be the same, although the lower row consists of only half the tenns in the 
top row. 


-829- 

Leibniz, who noticed this, thought it a contradiction, and concluded that, though there are infinite 
collections, there are no infinite numbers. Georg Cantor, on the contrary, boldly denied that it is a 
contradiction. He was right; it is only an oddity. 

Georg Cantor defined an ’'infinite” collection as one which has parts containing as many terms as 
the whole collection contains. On this basis he was able to build up a most interesting 
mathematical theory of infinite numbers, thereby taking into the realm of exact logic a whole 
region fonnerly given over to mysticism and confusion. 

The next man of importance was Frege, who published his first work in 1879, and his definition 
of "number" in 1884; but, in spite of the epoch-making nature of his discoveries, he remained 
wholly without recognition until I drew attention to him in 1903. It is remarkable that, before 
Frege, every definition of number that had been suggested contained elementary logical blunders. 
It was customary to identify "number" with "plurality." But an instance of "number" is a particular 
number, say 3, and an instance of 3 is a particular triad. The triad is a plurality, but the class of all 
triads— which Frege identified with the number 3— is a plurality of pluralities, and number in 
general, of which 3 is an instance, is a plurality of pluralities of pluralities. The elementary 
grammatical mistake of confounding this with the simple plurality of a given triad made the whole 
philosophy of number, before Frege, a tissue of nonsense in the strictest sense of the term 
"nonsense." 

From Frege's work it followed that arithmetic, and pure mathematics generally, is nothing but a 
prolongation of deductive logic. This disproved Kant's theory that arithmetical propositions are 
"synthetic" and involve a reference to time. The development of pure mathematics from logic was 
set forth in detail in Principia Mathematica, by Whitehead and myself. 

It gradually became clear that a great part of philosophy can be reduced to something that may be 
called "syntax," though the word has to be used in a somewhat wider sense than has hitherto been 
customary. Some men, notably Carnap, have advanced the theory that all philosophical problems 
are really syntactical, and that, when errors in syntax are avoided, a philosophical problem is 
thereby either solved or shown to be insoluble. I think this is an overstatement, but 


- 830 - 



there can be no doubt that the utility of philosophical syntax in relation to traditional problems is 
very great. 

I will illustrate its utility by a brief explanation of what is called the theory of descriptions. By a 
"description" I mean a phrase such as "The present President of the United States," in which a 
person or thing is designated, not by name, but by some property which is supposed or known to 
be peculiar to him or it. Such phrases had given a lot of trouble. Suppose I say "The golden 
mountain does not exist," and suppose you ask "What is it that does not exist?" It would seem 
that, if I say "It is the golden mountain," I am attributing some sort of existence to it. Obviously I 
am not making the same statement as if I said, "The round square does not exist." This seemed to 
imply that the golden mountain is one thing and the round square is another, although neither 
exists. The theory of descriptions was designed to meet this and other difficulties. 

According to this theory, when a statement containing a phrase of the form "the so-and-so" is 
rightly analysed, the phrase "the so-andso" disappears. For example, take the statement "Scott was 
the author of Waverley." The theory interprets this statement as saying: 

"One and only one man wrote Waverley, and that man was Scott." Or, more fully: 

"There is an entity c such that the statement 'x wrote Waverley' is true if x is c and false otherwise; 
moreover c is Scott." 

The first part of this, before the word "moreover," is defined as meaning: "The author of Waverley 
exists (or existed or will exist)." Thus "The golden mountain does not exist" means: 

"There is no entity c such that 'x is golden and mountainous is true when x is c, but not otherwise." 

With this definition the puzzle as to what is meant when we say "The golden mountain does not 
exist" disappears. 

"Existence," according to this theory, can only be asserted of descriptions. We can say "The author 
of Waverley exists," but to say "Scott exists" is bad grammar, or rather bad syntax. This clears up 
two millennia of muddle-headedness about "existence," beginning with Plato Theaetetus. 

One result of the work we have been considering is to dethrone mathematics from the lofty place 
that it has occupied since Pythagoras and Plato, and to destroy the presumption against empiricism 
which 


- 831 - 



has been derived from it. Mathematical knowledge, it is true, is not obtained by induction from 
experience; our reason for believing that 2 and 2 are 4 is not that we have so often found, by 
observation, that one couple and another couple together make a quartet. In this sense, 
mathematical knowledge is still not empirical. But it is also not a priori knowledge about the 
world. It is, in fact, merely verbal knowledge. "3" means "2 + 1," and "4" means "3 + 1." Hence it 
follows (though the proof is long) that "4" means the same as "2 + 2." Thus mathematical 
knowledge ceases to be mysterious. It is all of the same nature as the "great truth" that there are 
three feet in a yard. 

Physics, as well as pure mathematics, has supplied material for the philosophy of logical analysis. 
This has occurred especially through the theory of relativity and quantum mechanics. 

What is important to the philosopher in the theory of relativity is the substitution of space-time for 
space and time. Common sense thinks of the physical world as composed of "things" which 
persist through a certain period of time and move in space. Philosophy and physics developed the 
notion of "thing" into that of "material substance," and thought of material substance as consisting 
of particles, each very small, and each persisting throughout all time. Einstein substituted events 
for particles; each event had to each other a relation called "interval," which could be analysed in 
various ways into a timeelement and a space-element. The choice between these various ways was 
arbitrary, and no one of them was theoretically preferable to any other. Given two events A and B, 
in different regions, it might happen that according to one convention they were simultaneous, 
according to another A was earlier than B, and according to yet another B was earlier than A. No 
physical facts correspond to these different conventions. 

From all this it seems to follow that events, not particles, must be the "stuff of physics. What has 
been thought of as a particle will have to be thought of as a series of events. The series of events 
that replaces a particle has certain important physical properties, and therefore demands our 
attention; but it has no more substantiality than any other series of events that we might arbitrarily 
single out. Thus "matter" is not part of the ultimate material of the world, but merely a convenient 
way of collecting events into bundles. 

Quantum theory reinforces this conclusion, but its chief philosophi- 


- 832 - 



cal importance is that it regards physical phenomena as possibly discontinuous. It suggests that, in 
an atom (interpreted as above), a certain state of affairs persists for a certain time, and then 
suddenly is replaced by a finitely different state of affairs. Continuity of motion, which had always 
been assumed, appears to have been a mere prejudice. The philosophy appropriate to quantum 
theory, however, has not yet been adequately developed. I suspect that it will demand even more 
radical departures from the traditional doctrine of space and time than those demanded by the 
theory of relativity. 

While physics has been making matter less material, psychology has been making mind less 
mental. We had occasion in a fonner chapter to compare the association of ideas with the 
conditioned reflex. The latter, which has replaced the fonner, is obviously much more 
physiological. (This is only one illustration; I do not wish to exaggerate the scope of the 
conditioned reflex.) Thus from both ends physics and psychology have been approaching each 
other, and making more possible the doctrine of "neutral monism" suggested by William James's 
criticism of "consciousness." The distinction of mind and matter came into philosophy from 
religion, although, for a long time, it seemed to have valid grounds. I think that both mind and 
matter are merely convenient ways of grouping events. Some single events, I should admit, belong 
only to material groups, but others belong to both kinds of groups, and are therefore at once 
mental and material. This doctrine effects a great simplification in our picture of the structure of 
the world. 

Modern physics and physiology throw a new light upon the ancient problem of perception. If there 
is to be anything that can be called "perception," it must be in some degree an effect of the object 
perceived, and it must more or less resemble the object if it is to be a source of knowledge of the 
object. The first requisite can only be fulfilled if there are causal chains which are, to a greater or 
less extent, independent of the rest of the world. According to physics, this is the case. Light- 
waves travel from the sun to the earth, and in doing so obey their own laws. This is only roughly 
true. Einstein has shown that light-rays are affected by gravitation. When they reach our 
atmosphere, they suffer refraction, and some are more scattered than others. When they reach a 
human eye, all sorts of things happen which would not happen elsewhere, ending up with what we 
call "seeing the 


- 833 - 



sun." But although the sun of our visual experience is very different from the sun of the 
astronomer, it is still a source of knowledge as to the latter, because "seeing the sun" differs from 
"seeing the moon" in ways that are causally connected with the difference between the 
astronomer's sun and the astronomer's moon. What we can know of physical objects in this way, 
however, is only certain abstract properties of structure. We can know that the sun is round in a 
sense, though not quite the sense in which what we see is round; but we have no reason to suppose 
that it is bright or warm, because physics can account for its seeming so without supposing that it 
is so. Our knowledge of the physical world, therefore, is only abstract and mathematical. 

Modern analytical empiricism, of which I have been giving an outline, differs from that of Locke, 
Berkeley, and Hume by its incorporation of mathematics and its development of a powerful 
logical technique. It is thus able, in regard to certain problems, to achieve definite answers, which 
have the quality of science rather than of philosophy. It has the advantage, as compared with the 
philosophies of the systembuilders, of being able to tackle its problems one at a time, instead of 
having to invent at one stroke a block theory of the whole universe. Its methods, in this respect, 
resemble those of science. I have no doubt that, in so far as philosophical knowledge is possible, it 
is by such methods that it must be sought; I have also no doubt that, by these methods, many 
ancient problems are completely soluble. 

There remains, however, a vast field, traditionally included in philosophy, where scientific 
methods are inadequate. This field includes ultimate questions of value; science alone, for 
example, cannot prove that it is bad to enjoy the infliction of cruelty. Whatever can be known, can 
be known by means of science; but things which are legitimately matters of feeling lie outside its 
province. 

Philosophy, throughout its history, has consisted of two parts inharmoniously blended: on the one 
hand a theory as to the nature of the world, on the other an ethical or political doctrine as to the 
best way of living. The failure to separate these two with sufficient clarity has been a source of 
much confused thinking. Philosophers, from Plato to William James, have allowed their opinions 
as to the constitution of the universe to be influenced by the desire for edification: knowing, as 
they supposed, what beliefs would make men virtuous, 


- 834 - 



they have invented arguments, often very sophistical, to prove that these beliefs are true. For my 
part I reprobate this kind of bias, both on moral and on intellectual grounds. Morally, a 
philosopher who uses his professional competence for anything except a disinterested search for 
truth is guilty of a kind of treachery. And when he assumes, in advance of inquiry, that certain 
beliefs, whether true or false, are such as to promote good behaviour, he is so limiting the scope of 
philosophical speculation as to make philosophy trivial; the true philosopher is prepared to 
examine all preconceptions. When any limits are placed, consciously or unconsciously, upon the 
pursuit of truth, philosophy becomes paralysed by fear, and the ground is prepared for a 
government censorship punishing those who utter "dangerous thoughts"— in fact, the philosopher 
has already placed such a censorship over his own investigations. 

Intellectually, the effect of mistaken moral considerations upon philosophy has been to impede 
progress to an extraordinary extent. I do not myself believe that philosophy can either prove or 
disprove the truth of religious dogmas, but ever since Plato most philosophers have considered it 
part of their business to produce "proofs" of immortality and the existence of God. They have 
found fault with the proofs of their predecessors— SaintThomas rejected Saint Anselm’s proofs, 
and Kant rejected Descartes'— but they have supplied new ones of their own. In order to make their 
proofs seem valid, they have had to falsify logic, to make mathematics mystical, and to pretend 
that deep-seated prejudices were heaven-sent intuitions. 

All this is rejected by the philosophers who make logical analysis the main business of 
philosophy. They confess frankly that the human intellect is unable to find conclusive answers to 
many questions of profound importance to mankind, but they refuse to believe that there is some 
"higher" way of knowing, by which we can discover truths hidden from science and the intellect. 
For this renunciation they have been rewarded by the discovery that many questions, formerly 
obscured by the fog of metaphysics, can be answered with precision, and by objective methods 
which introduce nothing of the philosopher's temperament except the desire to understand. Take 
such questions as: What is number? What are space and time? What is mind, and what is matter? I 
do not say that we can here and now give definitive answers to all these ancient questions, but I do 
say that 


a method has been discovered by which, as in science, we can make successive approximations to 
the truth, in which each new stage results from an improvement, not a rejection, of what has gone 
before. 

In the welter of conflicting fanaticisms, one of the few unifying forces is scientific truthfulness, by 
which I mean the habit of basing our beliefs upon observations and inferences as impersonal, and 
as much divested of local and temperamental bias, as is possible for human beings. To have 
insisted upon the introduction of this virtue into philosophy, and to have invented a powerful 
method by which it can be rendered fruitful, are the chief merits of the philosophical school of 
which I am a member. The habit of careful veracity acquired in the practice of this philosophical 
method can be extended to the whole sphere of human activity, producing, wherever it exists, a 
lessening of fanaticism with an increasing capacity of sympathy and mutual understanding. In 
abandoning a part of its dogmatic pretensions, philosophy does not cease to suggest and inspire a 
way of life. 